While copyright trolling cases keep popping up, it's become quite impressive how many courts are dumping such cases often while slamming the trolls' strategy. It's now happened again. A judge in Massachusetts has called out a troll for its "lack of interest in actually litigating." The case involves porn company Patrick Collins, Inc., which has been involved in a ton of these trolling cases -- including some of those linked above -- along with another company, Discount Video Center, represented by the same lawyer. The full ruling (pdf) is worth reading. Basically, the judge (like many others) is completely onto Patrick Collins and the fact that it wants to use the court system as a part of its business model rather than for a legitimate judicial purpose. After noting that in an ordinary case against an unknown defendant, the purpose of seeking early discovery is to find out how to amend a lawsuit to include an actual named defendant. But here, the company seems to have no interest of doing such an amended filing since, instead, it just wants contact info to send out "pay up settlement" letters.

Yeah, the judge isn't pleased. He explains that their plan to get the names and then "figure out the rest" through settlement letters "is unacceptable." Also not good for Patrick Collins -- back in July, its lawyer had told the court that it would be filing actual lawsuits against individuals the following week... but "no such lawsuits against individual defendants were subsequently filed." In other words, the company was misrepresenting its intentions to the court -- a big no-no. It doesn't end there. The judge calls out Discount Video Center for seeking to "harass" a defendant and also engaging in judge shopping: Finally, the judge calls the plaintiffs out on the settlement letters they sent, noting that they falsely claim that the account holder has been sued, rather than the actual infringers, who may not be the same. What's amazing is that these rulings keep happening... and such cases keep getting filed as these trolls keep hoping to get a sympathetic (or clueless) judge to let them go through.
