This is only an industry rumour mind, and it’s only for the UK, but there is talk that either or both Microsoft and Google are planning to offer nationwide free Wi Fi. The technological trick to this being the use of “white space”, the gaps between other parts of the spectrum. One description of it is here:

The problem of course being that different parts of the country will have different parts of the spectrum available in this way. So it can’t be used to broadcast anything but it can be used for much more local matters. As long as there is one more piece of the puzzle:

White Space devices utilise spare frequencies not being used locally for TV transmissions; those bands would interfere with neighbouring transmitters if used for TV broadcasting but can be used for short-range radio links – taking advantage of the building penetration and range the frequencies permit. When White Spaces were first mooted, the idea was for devices to detect and avoid existing transmissions, but it turns out that’s both impossible and impractical (despite the best efforts of both Google and Microsoft), so devices are now required to call up a national database to get a list of locally available bands.

Which is pretty clever really. But it’s in the economics of this that it’s really clever. Spectrum is, of course, a limited resource. This is why the telecoms companies and TV broadcasters are willing to pay such vast sums of money for access to and ownership of it. However, this white space isn’t usable by either of them. But it is usable by something like a Wi-Fi service. Given that it doesn’t have the great big money making uses it’s obviously cheaper than those other slices of spectrum. Indeed, it’s thought and assumed that it will be free as long as devices do indeed contact that central database and tune in to what they’re allowed to use.

Which is where Google and or Microsoft come in:

Free Wi-Fi? That would be something of a selling point for either smartphones or tablets, wouldn’t it? Free, national, Wi-Fi?

The details of Google and Microsoft’s plans are not known, but telecoms analysts said the latter could be eyeing the white spaces as a way of building free, automatic wi-fi access into Nokia‘s new generation of Windows smartphones. Meanwhile Google could use the white spaces as a way of offering free wi-fi services to customers with phones powered by its Android operating system, as well as to other members of the public.

It would be something of a competitive advantage really. You’d rather be able to save on the data charges from the telecoms company after all. My only thought is that one country alone isn’t likely to be enough to change hardware designs (if that is even necessary). But as I understand it they’re looking at the same idea in the US: which is big enough to swing hardware designs all on its own.
