It's taken an official Microsoft blogger to reveal the real truth about Windows 8: it is a dud with consumers failing to upgrade to the new OS.
Paul Thurrott, tech blogger and Microsoft insider, has come out and said that Windows 8 PC sales have fallen well below Microsoft's expected target.

In Australia Microsoft's PR Company Ogilvy & Mather and internal PR hacks are refusing to return calls about the struggling Windows 8 or report how sales of their Surface Tablet are going with insiders now tipping the return of a "start button" in an effort to try and lure consumers to upgrade.

A big problem for Microsoft is that consumers are not buying new notebooks or hardware running Windows 8 which is creating issues between Microsoft and their partners such as Dell, HP, Toshiba, Acer and Asus.

Thurrott's blog reported "sales of Windows 8 PCs are well below Microsoft's internal projections and have been described inside the company as disappointing."

Thurrott went on to claim that Windows 8 PC sales may be a good indicator of why the tech giant has been so reluctant, particularly with the perceived conflict-of-interest with Surface sales.

Thurrott stated the reason for the sales slump may be that consumers just aren't that interested in Windows 8.

Now insiders are trying to anticipate what is going to happen and what changes are going to be seen with the OS as Microsoft moves into damage control. The form that Windows 8 has taken has been that of Steven Sinofsky, who suddenly quit the US Company last week.

Some observers claim that a return to the desktop-based Start Menu is one of the major changes that could take place as Microsoft tries to rescue sales.

Microsoft, who will not be at CES in January for the first time in two decades, is not only considering adding an alternative desktop start menu to Windows 8, but a new training module on the opening screen so that users can start to understand how the new Windows 8 actually works.

Despite announcing the sale of four million Windows 8 upgrades in the days following the OS' release, Microsoft remains tight-lipped about any figures relating to Surface or new Windows 8 PC sales.