We've got good news to share! Skype and Messenger are coming together. Millions of Messenger users will be able to reach their Messenger friends on Skype. By updating to Skype, Messenger users can instant message and video call their Messenger friends.

This effort started with the release of Skype 6.0 for Mac and Windows a few weeks ago, which allows you to sign into Skype using a Microsoft account. Now Messenger users just need to update to the latest version of Skype, sign in using a Microsoft account, and their Messenger contacts will be there.

Our goal remains to deliver the best communications experience for everyone, everywhere. We want to focus our efforts on making things simpler for our users while continuously improving the overall experience. We will retire Messenger in all countries worldwide in the first quarter of 2013 (with the exception of mainland China where Messenger will continue to be available).

Once you update to Skype, here are some of the other great features Messenger users can expect:

• Broader device support for all platforms, including iPad and Android tablets • Instant messaging, video calling, and calling landlines and mobiles all in one place • Sharing screens • Video calling on mobile phones • Video calling with Facebook friends • Group video calling

We will work with you over the next few months to help you transition and offer information and help along the way. To help you learn how to get the most out of Skype, be on the lookout for some special offers later this year as you join your Messenger friends in the migration. We think you will enjoy using Skype, and encourage you to download the latest version, sign in with your Microsoft account, and experience it for yourself.

Here is a quick look at what you, as a Messenger user, can do to talk to your Messenger contacts on Skype:

On the sign in screen, select the option to sign in with your Microsoft account. You will be asked if you are already using Skype or are a new user.

If you use Skype and Messenger already, you can merge your Skype and Messenger account into your Microsoft account.

When you complete the installation process you will be welcomed into Skype with your buddy list already synced into your Skype contact list.

And you can start instant messaging right away!

We'd love to hear your feedback. Discuss what matters to you on theSkype Support Networkor share your feedback on Twitter with hashtag #SkypeWLM. We are here to help!

What about write to an WLM-account without having one yourself? If you are going to do this, you should make group calls FREE! What about the games that are playable through WLM? How will we be able to access those via Skype? Make group calls free and this will work just fine, and get rid of the nasty ads that are plastered throughout the app in windows 8. I love skype. But with all these bunch of users moving to skype I just wonder how much time left skype has. When it starts collapsing and you cannot make a call, then it will be the time to move to a fresh platform. And Microsoft will have done it again: destroy every popular system it has created. What I'd like to know is, will your skype user name remain, or will everyone have to find you through your microsoft account? You HAVE to redo the UI on the windows desktop version! It's so messy and cumbersome. (Metro version is a joy though) What about remote assistance? One key feature of WLM is that you can use it to initiate remote assistance sessions. I don't see this feature in Skype... Terrible development to me, since its a fine VOIP service but terrible in terms of IM 1) Will i still be able to use the WLM Protocoll with Adium (Your Skype design is really the worst i know be it on mac or windows...i use both, no offline messages, no scaleable messaging window, no clean basic look, nothing like the look of Skype 2.8 for mac) 2) Does Skype support more than 1 WLM Accounts? (1 for Family and good friends 1 for aquiantaces) 3) Can i use different Usernames i have a differen Username for WLM and Skype? (1 for Family 1 for friends) God its the worst development in those 10 years i am using MSN and those last 6-7 Years i am using Skype. i dont want to merge them into one account. So will i be forced to give up on my Contacts? I've merged my accounts but I still can't login using my MS account in either this site or my Android app... Have to use my Skype account to login. I have some confusion and questions. Why didn’t Microsoft retire Windows Messenger before Windows 8 and Windows Phone 8 release? The Messaging App on Windows 8 and Windows Phone 8 is Windows Messenger. What will happen to that? Why create a Skype app for Windows 8 and keep the Messages app for Windows 8? Will they keep Windows Messenger service but just get rid of Windows Messenger desktop and mobile app? I have the same friends on both Skype and Windows Messenger and I see two screen names…are they going to merge into one? How about before you dump a bunch of users on here with access to my account that I really don't want to have or communicate with (contrary to popular belief not every body has or cares to have WLM account) you work on the the current Droid issues like why my new Razor M is not adaptable to Skype.
