With Labor saying that they're no longer considering a government-mandatory filter, here are companies that are still censoring Internet access in Australia under a ISP-voluntary industry scheme.

1) it is legally possible that by establishing a censorship framework, courts can very well compel ISPs to censor 'illegal' websites. It happened in Denmark with a Redditor explaining the transition

2) The list only contains companies that spoke about the internet filter in public.

Primus implemented IIA's mandatory internet filter on users. Not known what level of filtering. [4] Vodafone supports IIA's mandatory internet filter on users. Plans to adopt it. [5] New Cyberone (now Apex Telecom) is listed as a participant in IIA's mandatory internet filter on users. 'Two small ISPs' (Could be some from the IIA list) [1] iiNet, refuses to have a public position on the current industry Internet filter. However, it could be likely part of the 90% amount of Internet activity that Conroy says, is imposing mandatory filtering on users. [6][7] Despite all this, they're proudly listed on the industry filter scheme support page as using a 'family-friendly' filter to provide 'filtering software or services'. [3] iiNet seems to support the interpol filter, as well [8] iiNet seems to have received a 313 notice according to AFP's FoI, I gather to force them to adopt a filtering service according to s313 law. Adding more to the suspicion that iiNet are censoring, but it's not confirmed yet. Internode. Simon Hackett continues to deny that Internode wants to implement the filter unless they have to by law. Despite those vague statements, according to AFP FoI; Internode is part of the list of "ISP's expressed an interest and preparing to use the [interpol] list". Based on AFP's FoI, statements being vague about not having a filter 'unless compelled to' and to be on the safe side, I'll put Internode on the censor suspicion list. At least, to compel them to clarify if they had been planning or have any such filter in place (compelled by law or not). Westnet. Part of supporters of industry internet filter scheme. [3] Since they're part of iiNet group, their position is effectively the same as iiNet's.
