Last week’s revelation that Apple iPhones and Google Android-based smart phones were retaining locational information generated howls of protest from privacy advocates and government officials. Concerned that mobile devices were tracking our digital footsteps, many wanted “steps to be taken” to address their worries.

Some of the concerns raised about the retention of locational data are valid. But panic, prohibition and a “privacy precautionary principle” that would preemptively block technological innovation until government regulators give their blessings are not valid answers to these concerns. The struggle to conceptualize and protect privacy rights should be an evolutionary and experimental process, not one micro-managed at every turn by regulation.

Regulation should enter the picture only when companies break the promises they make to consumers or engage in deceptive practices. If serious harm has come to someone because of data disclosure, the Federal Trade Commission already has the power to crack down on companies, or lawsuits and class actions can be pursued.

The data collected on Apple phones was brought to light after some computer science geeks unearthed a file buried on iPhones that can only be read on a computer that is syncing with the user’s device. This means the most likely snoop of your data would be someone already known to you. This could be a problem when an abusive spouse is involved, but in most circumstances, this is likely not a serious issue.

Government access to locational data, however, is a more significant issue. Governments possess unique powers the private sector lacks, such as taxation, surveillance, fines, and imprisonment. Indeed, the Obama administration is asking the Supreme Court to rule that the police can surreptitiously attach GPS devices to your car and track your movements—without a warrant or oversight of any kind. Meanwhile in Michigan, police are downloading the entire contents of citizens’ smartphones — including geolocation information, emails, texts, and call histories — when stopping them even for routine traffic offenses.

People genuinely concerned about privacy should focus their attention on these state-sponsored abuses and how to limit them. Congress should update the Electronic Communications Privacy Act of 1986 to ensure adequate safeguards against unwarranted snooping by the law enforcement and a subpoena process that places a high bar on government access to phone records.

Some critics worry about companies using locational data for advertising or marketing purposes even though that doesn’t happen much today. Even in this case it is unclear where the harm lies. If our phones know we are walking by an ice cream parlor and the store’s owner is offering free scoops to nearby consumers who find the shop with their phones, that seems like a benefit, not a harm.

After all, while for some privacy trumps all other considerations, for others locational data provides the services they expect.  For finding the location of an appointment, seeking out a restaurant in a new neighborhood, or networking with a friend, geo-location is a “must-have” feature on digital devices.

Optimally, companies should get clear consent before any “tracking” features collect data about user whereabouts. But in practice, consent can be tricky. What data does the user own? What data do those who provide us with innovative (and often free) services own?
