Android overtakes the iPhone OS in units sold, while Facebook faces a user backlash. Also: Microsoft unveils Office 2010.

Is Google stealing some of Apple's iPhone thunder?

Google's Android operating system edged out Apple's iPhone operating system for the No. 2 spot in the U.S. consumer smartphone market in the first quarter, according to research firm NPD Group.

According to NPD, devices running Android accounted for 28 percent of the units sold to U.S. consumers in the first quarter of 2010. BlackBerry devices made by Research In Motion, which use RIM's homegrown operating system, took the top spot with 36 percent of the U.S. market. Apple's iPhone, which had been in the No. 2 spot previously, fell to third place with 21 percent of the market.

However, Android is an operating system that is available on several different models of phones made by different manufacturers, such as Motorola, HTC, and Samsung. Meanwhile, Apple's operating system is used only on Apple's own iPhone. ?  Google executives reflect on year at annual meeting ?  RIM's strategy to stay on top in smartphones ?  Verizon: We're making a tablet with Google

Social network releases promising numbers for publishers tapping its social plug-ins product. That probably won't do much to calm privacy fears.

Facebook targeted by phishers more than Google, IRS, and Bank of America, Kaspersky Lab study finds.

Though event is aimed at corporate customers, Microsoft touts how consumers can use the free version and mobile app that access the software suite.

Following Apple's allegations of patent infringement, the handset maker says the iPhone, iPad , and iPod together violate five of its patents.

A blog discovers a flaw in which users can force other users to follow them--and tested it out on Facebook's Mark Zuckerberg and CEO Evan Williams.

U.S. District court judge rules for summary judgment, finding the company behind the file-sharing program and founder Mark Gorton liable for copyright infringement.

John Lilly will step down later in 2010. His successor will face a new challenges ranging from a reawakened Microsoft to new browser uses.

Some number-crunching on pricing shows that it might not be worth auctioning off the device once it's available outside of the U.S.

In a commencement speech at Virginia's Hampton University, the president offers that gadgets turn information into a distraction. He also says he doesn't know how to use an iPod, iPad, Xbox, or PlayStation.

The developer kit is designed to ease use of its Native Client technology, which is at the vanguard of Google's cloud-computing effort.

On orders from California regulators, the utility reports that thousands of meters have suffered technical glitches, leading to inaccurate bills.

Also of note ?  New DoS attack uses Web servers as zombies ?  TechCrunch50 start-up show canceled ?  SAP to buy Sybase for $5.8 billion
