Amsterdam, the Netherlands, – Building on its innovation capabilities, today Philips unveils hue, the world’s smartest web-enabled LED home lighting system. Philips hue signals a new era in home lighting both in the way we think about and experience light in our homes. It allows you to create and control the light using your smartphone or tablet. Bringing endless possibilities to help you get creative and help you personalize your lighting to suit yours and your family’s lifestyle, Philips hue is available exclusively from Apple stores from 30th October. A starter pack includes three bulbs[1] that simply screw into your existing lamps, and a bridge that you plug into your home Wi-Fi router. Simply download the hue app to start experiencing light in a completely new way.

Philips hue can be setup in minutes. The intuitive app allows you to remotely control your home lighting to help secure your home, personalize your home lighting experience with custom settings and program timers to help manage your daily schedules, all through the convenience of a smart device. An intuitive and seamless system, Philips hue is upgradeable and future-proof, with the potential for more features to be downloaded and enjoyed in the future.

With its high quality energy-saving LED light, Philips hue allows you to tune shades of white light or create any color. In addition, Philips hue can:

The app for Philips’ hue also features expert LightRecipes:  four pre-programmed lighting settings based on Philips’ research around the biological effects that lighting has on the body.  These scenarios adjust bulbs to the optimum shade and brightness of white light to help you relax, read, concentrate or energize.

Jeroen de Waal, Head of Marketing & Strategy at Philips Lighting commented:  “Philips hue is a game-changer in lighting – a completely new way to experience and interact with light. In the way phones, media and entertainment have been revolutionized by digital technology, now we can also personalize light and enjoy limitless applications.  Philips continues to redefine the possibilities of LED technology, and hue pushes the boundaries even more, not only in offering great light quality, but in how lighting can be digitized and integrated with our world to further simplify and enhance our lives.”  

In home tests conducted in New York, Berlin and Shanghai, users highlighted hue’s great quality light, programmable timers and the fact they could control their lighting from outside the home as features they most appreciated.  Moreover, consumers liked the ability to save personal light settings and recreate them at the touch of a button as well as the convenience of managing their lighting from their mobile device.

Philips is opening up the hue app to the developer community and has created an open source platform at www.meethue.com  inviting developers to explore the app and unleash even more possibilities to show what light can do to enhance your life. You can share light scenes or get inspired on the meethue.com community site. Philips hue uses the open ZigBee Light Link standard so that it can be integrated with other ZigBee certified systems.

Building on the success of its AmbiLight experience, Philips is developing future product features, such as allowing hue to integrate with other media including sound and video.  Philips is also working on features such as geo-location services, allowing hue to sense when you are close to home and automatically turn on the lights, or turn them off when you leave.   

Philips hue is available only from Apple stores and Apple.com for $ 199 / € 199 / £179. To find out more, visit www.meethue.com. 

For further information, please contact:Jeannet HarpePhilips LightingTel +31 6 53 722221Email: jeannet.harpe@philips.com

About Royal Philips ElectronicsRoyal Philips Electronics of the Netherlands (NYSE: PHG, AEX: PHI) is a diversified health and well-being company, focused on improving people’s lives through timely innovations. As a world leader in healthcare, lifestyle and lighting, Philips integrates technologies and design into people-centric solutions, based on fundamental customer insights and the brand promise of “sense and simplicity.” Headquartered in the Netherlands, Philips employs approximately 122,000 employees with sales and services in more than 100 countries worldwide. With sales of EUR 22.6 billion in 2011, the company is a market leader in cardiac care, acute care and home healthcare, energy efficient lighting solutions and new lighting applications, as well as lifestyle products for personal well-being and pleasure with strong leadership positions in male shaving and grooming, portable entertainment and oral healthcare. News from Philips is located at www.philips.com/newscenter. 

About ZigBee Light LinkZigBee Light Link gives the lighting industry a global standard for interoperable and very easy-to-use consumer lighting and control products. It allows consumers to gain wireless control over all their LED fixtures, light bulbs, timers, remotes and switches. Products using this standard will let consumers change lighting remotely to reflect ambiance, task or season, all while managing energy use and making their homes greener.

Products built using this standard are as easy-to-use as a common dimmer switch. The standard does not require any special devices to coordinate with the lighting network, making it both easy and intuitive for consumers to use every day. Plus, it makes adding or even removing products to the lighting network a quick and easy. ZigBee Light Link products earning the ZigBee Certified seal are the industry's only networked consumer lighting products offering simplicity and interoperability.

Since ZigBee Light Link is a ZigBee standard, lighting products will interoperate effortlessly with products using other ZigBee standards already in consumers' homes, including ZigBee Home Automation, ZigBee Input Device, ZigBee Remote Control and ZigBee Health Care.

Leading home lighting solution manufacturers who contributed their expertise to the development of ZigBee Light Link, including GE, Greenwave, OSRAM Sylvania and Philips.
