Netflix shares are trading sharply higher Friday on rumors that Microsoft might be interested in buying the company.

Now, let’s think this through.

For starters, it is Friday afternoon, where New York is bracing for some sort of MegaStorm, while out here in the Bay Area everyone is busily gloating about the Giants taking the first two games of the World Series from the Tigers. If ever there were a time to be floating rumors, this is the time, while attention spans are short and trading volume is thin.

For another, this rumor almost certainly stems back to the recent announcement that Netflix CEO Reed Hastings has decided to step down from Microsoft‘s board of directors. As I noted recently, one potential reason for that news could be that Microsoft is thinking about buying Netflix; if so, they certainly couldn’t have Reed hanging around the Microsoft board room trying to figure out how much to bid. On the other hand, Hastings may have left for other reasons. Maybe Microsoft’s moves into content with Xbox Live were becoming uncomfortably competitive. Maybe he’s just too darned busy. (He also sits on Facebook‘s board, for instance.)

Now, I’d also note that Netflix has a market cap of just $3.7 billion. The stock trades at roughly half of its 52-week high. While competition has increased, the company still has an iconic brand in streaming video and widespread distribution on almost every conceivable computer and consumer electronics platform: smartphones, tablets, PCs, TVs, Blu-Ray players, blenders. (OK, no blenders.) Microsoft has almost $69 billion in cash and investments. The company could pay 2x the current market cap, and still use less than 10% of the cash. (Although I would point out that a large chunk of that cash is outside the country, and basically inaccessible for U.S. acquisitions.)

Meanwhile, buying Netflix would be in keeping with Microsoft’s revamped philosophy on the Xbox 360, which treats the device more like an entertainment device and less like a video game console. I’d note that Microsoft has a track record here on shopping for Web brands: They paid $8.5 billion for Skype; and of course they tried in vain to buy Yahoo a few years back for an ungodly sum.

So, in short, there are lots of reasons to think that a deal makes sense. But whether there’s anything more here than idle speculation…I have no idea.

NFLX is up $5.68, or 9.2%, to $67.19.
