Hurricane Sandy may have come and gone, but it’s still causing problems inside the massive computing facilities erected on the southern tip of Manhattan.

When the hurricane crashed into Lower Manhattan on Monday, two major data centers were seriously damaged as waters flooded their basements. One went completely dark, knocking out several big-name websites, including Gawker, Gizmodo, and The Huffington Post, and the other could go down in a matter of hours.

Both basements — 33 Whitehall Street and other just blocks away at 75 Broad — house fuel pumps that plug into generators designed to provide backup power in the event of a blackout. The hurricane had already knocked out the local power grid, and when it sunk the pumps, these massive computing facilities also lost at least part of their Plan B.

According to DataGram — an internet service provider and web hosting operation that operates the Whitehall Street data center, a stone’s throw from the southern tip of Manhattan — its backup generators successfully kicked in after the power grid went down, but this didn’t last long. “Within a couple hours of the storm hitting Manhattan’s shores, the building’s entire basement — which houses the building’s fuel tank pumps and sub pumps — was inundated with water taking the building generator system offline — essentially shutting down the entire building,” read a message posted to the company’s website.

Much same the thing happened at 75 Broad Street, but according to Robert Miggins — senior vice president of business development with Peer 1, one of the hosting companies that occupy the data center — the facility remained online because there’s also a generator on the 18th floor. This generator, however, is rapidly running out of fuel, and unless its tanks can be replenished, Peer 1 will go down too.

“We’re working as hard as possible to supply fuel to that upper generator,” Miggins tells Wired. “But that’s hard. It’s hard because there has been a disaster … but it’s also hard because this is New York. Manhattan is an island. You have to get the fuel from somewhere else and drive it over a bridge.”

The situation shows that in many ways, Lower Manhattan is one terrible place to put a data center. As 33 Whitehall and 75 Broad struggled to stay online, do did 111 Eighth Avenue, a facility owned by Google that sits a little farther up the island. But at the same time, these facilities are there for good reason. Despite the drawbacks, Lower Manhattan is prime data center real estate.

After all, Wall Street is the hub of the business world, and there are millions of people living and working on the island of Manhattan. Companies as disparate as Google, AT&T, and the world’s biggest financial firms all want their machines on the island, hoping to keep network delays as small as possible. Data center outfit Digital Realty Trust recently opened at facility in Lower Manhattan, at the request of certain customers, according to a company spokeswoman.

But Lower Manhattan is also a communications hub, with many of the internet’s trans-Atlantic cables plugging into facilities at the tip of the island. This is also where you need to be if you want to reach the rest of the world. It’s also where you need to be if you want to quickly connect to the rest of the U.S. says Andrew Blum, a writer who has made a study of the internet’s physical infrastructure in this book, Tubes: A Journey to the Center of the Internet.

It might be cheaper to set up your data center across the Hudson River, but that can slow down traffic, especially if you’ve got readers or customers in Manhattan, Blum says. “If you’re in the boonies of New Jersey, then the first hop is going to be 111 Eighth Avenue or or 60 Hudson anyway,” he says, referring to another large Manhattan facility.

New York has operated this way for decades — well before data centers were built with servers and network switches. The data center at 60 Hudson Street — in Tribeca, just north of Lower Manhattan — once served as the brain of Western Union, the old telegraph company. “It was packed with telegraph cables and pneumatic tubes,” says Peter Feldman, the CEO of DataGryd, a company that now leases space in the facility. Today, the data center is home not only to DataGryd but such communication giants as AT&T and Verizon.

Likewise, 75 Broad Street was once home to the International Telephone & Telegraph corporation. It has been a data center for nearly a hundred years. In other words, you won’t see it or any of its sister facilities moving out of Manhattan anytime soon.

As Miggins points out, Sandy isn’t your average storm. “Sandy scrapped the entire eastern seaboard and wreaked billions of dollars in havoc across twelve states,” he says. “We’re just a blip on the map.” And as we published this story, Peer 1 and 75 Broad had not actually gone dark. Yes, DataGram was offline, but within hours of the storm, many of its customer had found ways of getting back up and running.

Several other major Manhattan data centers have also stayed up amid the storm, most notably the Google-owned 111 Eighth Avenue. According to Equinix — a tenant at 111 Eighth — some of its customers experienced outages after a generator failed to operate properly, and there have been other reports of outages at the facility. But it appears that the building’s core infrastructure stayed up. Google did not immediately respond to a request for comment, and it’s unclear how the company makes use of the data center for its own services.

According to Robert Miggins, a fuel truck had arrived at 75 Broad by about 1:30 p.m. PDT, but those at the facility were still struggling to get the fuel into the generator onto the 18th floor. He wasn’t completely confident that this would happen — and he acknowledged the severity of the situation — but he also said that when you run a data center, it’s not exactly unexpected. “This is what we’re here for,” he said.
