We always knew the Apple / Samsung lawsuit would produce some major fireworks, and Samsung just lit off a corker: the company filed a motion Friday night asking Apple to turn over the iPhone 5 and iPad 3 as part of the discovery process. Seriously! Samsung claims that it needs to see Apple's future products because devices like the Droid Charge and Galaxy Tab 10.1 will presumably be in the market at the same time as the iPhone 5 and iPad 3, and Samsung's lawyers want to evaluate any possible similarities so they can prepare for further potential legal action from Apple. It's ballsy, but it's not totally out of the blue: the move comes just a few days after the judge ordered Samsung to hand over pre-production samples of the Droid Charge, Infuse 4G, Galaxy S II, and Galaxy Tab 10.1 and 8.9 so Apple could determine if those products should also be part of the lawsuit and potentially file a motion to block them from the market.

Now, the key difference between the two requests is that Samsung had already announced its products, while Apple has maintained its traditional iron silence about future devices. But there's some additional nuance involved as well, as well as some bigger-picture implications -- let's walk through the entire situation, shall we?

Now, given that most of the Samsung products on the list were already either available or fully disclosed, it wasn't surprising that Apple won -- in fact, it's more interesting that Samsung had chose to fight back on such a minor issue in the first place, since it had so little at stake. (And it's also somewhat interesting that Apple even asked for Samsung's products in discovery instead of just filing for an injunction from the get-go, since they had all been announced already.) It's a tell: no little compromises means no big compromises are in the works. So now let's step through Samsung's motion to see the iPhone 5 and iPad 3 and try to get a sense of what's actually happening in context.

So that's Samsung's motion. It's pretty strange, if you think about it: Samsung is arguing that Apple might file for a preliminary injunction, and that it might happen sometime after Apple might release a new iPhone and iPad. That's a lot of assumptions -- and Apple can basically kill this entire line of argument dead by filing for that injunction Monday morning and saying that Samsung's already-announced products should be blocked from market because they'll cause confusion with the iPhone 4 and iPad 2 for however many months remain before the new versions are released. Neither the court nor Samsung really need to see Apple's unreleased products to deal with that. And even if Samsung wins, Apple will definitely appeal the decision, putting the entire case on hold while things get sorted out... a process that will almost certainly stretch past the iPhone 5's expected release in the fall, rendering this entire argument somewhat moot. And what happens if Samsung eventually gets the iPhone 5 and determines that the Droid Charge infringes Apple's patents and trademarks? Is it going to change the Droid Charge? The potential outcomes aren't entirely favorable here.

So why is Samsung even pursuing this? I think it's a calculated gamble for additional leverage. Apple and Samsung held negotiations for a year before giving up and heading to the courts, and I'm reliably informed that there haven't been any substantive settlement discussions since Apple first filed its complaint. That means talks have been at a standstill for a long time now, and I wouldn't be surprised if Samsung was trying to put some additional heat on Apple to try and kick negotiations back into gear. It's an interesting and aggressive move in its own right, but it also highlights the fact that neither Apple nor Samsung have addressed the actual merits of their complaints in formal replies -- this is a minor skirmish before the real battle begins. We'll see if this sideshow accomplishes anything beyond clever lawyerly maneuvering, but for right now it's clear that Apple and Samsung aren't planning to back down anytime soon.
