HTC has filed a law suit against Apple seeking a ban on imports of Asian-manufactured iPhones, iPods and iPads into the United States.

The HTC caction alleges that Apple products infringed five HTC patents and seeks to have them barred from sale in the United States from their manufacturing facilities in Asia. Apple declined to comment.

"We are taking this action against Apple to protect our intellectual property, our industry partners, and most importantly our customers that use HTC phones," HTC vice president for North America Jason Mackenzie said.

"HTC believes the industry should be driven by healthy competition and innovation that offer consumers the best, most accessible mobile experiences possible," Mackenzie said in a statement.

HTC, which stands for High Tech Computer, is Taiwan's leading smartphone maker. It is already the target of a patent suit by Apple filed in March alleging infringement of 20 iPhone patents including "user interface, underlying architecture and hardware". Apple too wants a ban on sales of HTC devices in the dispute.

HTC makes handsets for a number of leading US companies and is the manufacturer of the Nexus One unveiled by Apple rival Google in January. It also makes other Android-based phones, including the Desire, sold in Australia, which some believe is a potential iPhone killer.

While Apple's lawsuit against HTC did not name Google as a defendant, it was seen as a strategic move against Google, whose free mobile software also powers handsets from Samsung Electronics, Motorola and others.

HTC's complaints re unlikely to block sales of Apple products any time soon. Patent disputes are common among technology companies and often take years to resolve. The cases often lead to licensing agreements rather than outright bans on imports.

The wild success of the first iPhone, which launched in 2007, prompted other mobile phone phone makers to rush out touch-screen smart phones of their own in a bid to lure consumers, not just business users attached to their BlackBerry phones.

At the end of 2009, iPhones made up about 14 per cent of smart phones sold worldwide, according to the research group Gartner. Apple inched closer to BlackBerry maker Research in Motion, which had 20 per cent of sales. But Android phones, while accounting for only four per cent of sales, grew at a faster rate than Apple last year.

Apple is also being sued by Nokia for patent infringement. It has fired a countersuit against the Finnish mobile phone giant.

Canada's Research in Motion, maker of the Blackberry, has also had its share of patent woes and was accused of patent infringement by US mobile phone maker Motorola in a suit filed in January.
