I know it's not a mind blowing concept, and frankly it's the way I see the cellular industry proceeding, or would expect to proceed, within the next, maybe, five years or so. I'm just curious if anyone in the know - whether it be someone that works on the communication hardware, or works for any of the major telecom companies, or is an engineer on any of the communication infrastructure, etc. - could tell me what's holding things up.

I have the impression, with the advent of smart phones like the iPhone and various Android handsets, that the cellular industry will be shifting to a service whereby all information to and from a user's phone will simply be data - very similar to a computer and an internet connection, frankly. As phones become more PC/Mac-esque, it simply seems like an inevitability. You have a portable device, and information is accessed through a telecom's cellular network.

So what's preventing this sort of shift? I'm aware that the telecoms are able to set different pricing depending on the type of usage in a manner that doesn't accurately reflect the strain on their infrastructure - particularly for text messages, if I understand things correctly. So is it purely about money? Or, is there actually something technically different between a smartphone making a call, sending a text, or receiving data that does genuinely affect the manner in which these different forms of communication are handled on the network's side of things?

It just blows my mind how different the cellular phone industry is from other seemingly similar services, such as internet, television, and home phone. I don't understand how or why customers continue to put up with extensive two or three year contracts for a service that should, I would think, be a simple month to month access to data. Effectively, very similar to cellular/satellite access to the internet though your phone, and no more.

(I'd also like to see a shift away from subsidized phone prices, much like Apple is trying to do. Buy an unlocked phone every few years as necessary, and find a provider that can hook you up month to month. But that's an entirely different topic all together.)
