WARREN, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Virgin Mobile USA announced today it will offer iPhone to its prepaid customers beginning Friday, June 29. Virgin Mobile will offer iPhone 4 and iPhone 4S with its Beyond Talk unlimited data and messaging plans as low as $30 per-month on the Sprint Nationwide Network. iPhone will be available without a contract and with no fees for activation or roaming. New and existing customers can purchase iPhone at www.virginmobileusa.com, RadioShack, Best Buy and select local retailers.

iPhone 4S is the most amazing iPhone yet, packed with incredible features including Apple’s dual-core A5 chip for blazing fast performance and stunning graphics; an all-new camera with advanced optics; full 1080p HD resolution video recording; and Siri, an intelligent assistant that helps you get things done just by asking. iPhone 4S comes with iOS 5.1, the world’s most advanced mobile operating system, and iCloud, a breakthrough set of free cloud services that work with your iPhone, iPad, iPod touch, Mac or PC to automatically and wirelessly store your content in iCloud and push it to all your devices.

Virgin Mobile's Beyond Talk unlimited data and messaging plans for iPhone start at $35 per month for access to Sprint's Nationwide Network, and customers can receive a $5 per-month plan discount when they register for automatic monthly payments with a credit card, debit card or PayPal account, making iPhone available for as low as $30 per month. Customers can also use their iPhone as a mobile hotspot through Virgin Mobile for an additional $15 per month.

“This month marks Virgin Mobile USA’s tenth birthday,” said Sir Richard Branson, founder of Virgin Group. “And what better way to thank our fans for ten years of loyalty than by giving them exactly what they want: the perfect plan for the perfect phone. That is the essence of ‘A Higher Calling.’”

For more information about iPhone on Virgin Mobile, including special alerts for when iPhone goes on sale on June 29, please visit www.virginmobileusa.com/iphone.

For more information on iPhone 4S, please visit: www.apple.com/iphone.

Virgin Mobile USA, one of Sprint's prepaid brands, offers millions of customers control, flexibility and connectivity through Virgin Mobile Beyond Talk no-contract plans with unlimited data for mobile phone service, including Android-powered smartphones and prepaid Broadband2Go high-speed Web access on the Nationwide Sprint Network. Virgin Mobile USA customers have access to service on the Nationwide Sprint 3G Network for data reaching more than 276 million people and reaching more than 280 million people for voice services. Virgin Mobile-branded devices are available at more than 40,000 retail stores, including Target, Walmart, Best Buy and RadioShack. Top-Up cards are available at approximately 150,000 locations nationwide and can be used for Broadband2Go services. Virgin Mobile USA was recently ranked “Highest Ranked Customer Service Performance among Non-Contract Wireless Providers” by J.D. Power and Associates. Experience Virgin Mobile on the Web at Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and purchase Virgin Mobile USA products at www.virginmobileusa.com.

All plans include 2.5GB/month of full speed data. Virgin Mobile USA customers have access to service on the Nationwide Sprint 3G Network for data reaching more than 276 million people and reaching more than 280 million people for voice service

With purchase of Mobile Hotspot, plans include 3.5GB per month of full speed data

Virgin Mobile USA received the highest numerical score among non-contract wireless providers in the proprietary J.D. Power and Associates 2012 Wireless Customer Care Non-Contract Study – Vol. 1. Study based on responses from 2,840 consumers measuring six non-contract wireless providers and measures opinions of consumers who contacted customer care within the past year. Proprietary study results are based on experiences and perceptions of consumers surveyed July-December 2011. Your experiences may vary. Visit jdpower.com.
