AP launches its first Spanish-language stylebook (AP) — Spanish-language journalists can now learn that the correct word for channel-surfing is "zapeo," sexting is best written in their language as "sextear," ''submarino" is an accepted term for waterboarding and Thanksgiving day is accurately translated as "Dia de Accion de Gracias."

HP's Autonomy deal highlights pattern of bad ideas (AP) — Hewlett-Packard's $9.7 billion acquisition of Autonomy seemed like a bad idea long before Tuesday's allegations of an accounting scandal made clear it was a deal that should never have happened.

Pastor: Boy feigned death to survive ND killings (AP) — Twelve-year-old Christian Schuster survived a deadly shooting in North Dakota by feigning death as he lay under his slain brother's body, and an 8-year-old sister was spared because she was down the street sledding on a snowy hill, the family's pastor said.

Prosecutor: Search warrants issued in Indy blast (AP) — Investigators have served search warrants and are questioning people in connection with an Indianapolis house explosion that killed two people and destroyed at least five homes.

Elmo actor resigns amid underage-sex allegations (AP) — Elmo puppeteer Kevin Clash resigned from "Sesame Street" on Tuesday amid allegations he sexually abused underage boys, bringing an end to a 28-year career in which he turned the furry red monster into one of the most beloved — and lucrative — characters on TV and in toy stores.

Ex-'Price is Right' model wins suit against show (AP) — A Los Angeles jury says a former model on "The Price is Right" was discriminated against by producers because of her pregnancy.

McCain welcomes new fighter jet squadron (AP) — Sen. John McCain on Tuesday welcomed the Marine Corps' first squadron of pilots who are being called upon to fly the branch's version of the next-generation F-35 fighter jet out of its long and troubled testing phase.

Mavs' Nowitzki still unsure when he will play (AP) — Dirk Nowitzki was hoping to be back on the court sooner, even when the Dallas Mavericks were saying after his surgery that it could be at least six weeks before any basketball activity.

FDA approves first-of-a-kind seasonal flu vaccine (AP) — The Food and Drug Administration says it has approved the first seasonal flu vaccine made using animal cell technology, rather than the half-century egg method.

Ex-Marcos aide charged in NY with art conspiracy (AP) — A former secretary to Imelda Marcos was charged Tuesday in New York with conspiracy to sell valuable artworks that disappeared during the collapse of Marcos' husband's regime in the Philippines.

Review: Cotillard stars in raw 'Rust and Bone' Merely the premise of "Rust and Bone" sounds uncomfortably maudlin: A wayward single father and part-time fighter falls into an unexpected romance with a beautiful whale trainer who's just lost both her legs below the knee in a freak accident. Both must undergo drastic transformations that render them as vulnerable as newborn babies. Both are literally and metaphorically broken and must help each other heal.

Guardianship extended for 'Modern Family' star (AP) — A judge on Tuesday determined that teen actress Ariel Winter's mother should not regain custody of the "Modern Family" star and the 14-year-old should remain in her sister's care for the next several weeks.

Army veteran drove float in Texas parade crash (AP) — The driver of a parade float filled with wounded veterans and their spouses that was struck by a freight train in West Texas is an Army veteran himself who is "in shock" over the accident that killed four people, an attorney said Tuesday.
