A lot of companies still question whether the iPhone will become a serious enough business tool for their employees to use at work. These businesses got at least a tentative answer when Apple Inc. added business-friendly features such as integration with Microsoft Exchange ActiveSync, which indicated that the iPhone could work with a key business application. But the most convincing proof of the device's business-friendliness will be the widespread availability of underlying technical components that let developers easily create business applications for the iPhone. A recent VoIP announcement by a company called GIPS (Global IP Solutions) falls into the latter category.

GIPS uses ingenious technology, in the form of what it calls a "voice engine," to improve the quality of IP phone calls. GIPS' customers incorporate the voice engine in softphones or other software to make the VoIP calls that they provide sound better. The customers' software typically handles chores like call setup and the user interface, while the voice engine takes care of delivering high-quality audio. GIPS' technology deals with problems like jitter and packet loss — that is, voice packets that arrive inconsistently or not at all. The breadth of companies that use GIPS' technology testifies to its effectiveness: Customers range from AOL LLC to EarthLink Inc. to Skype Ltd. to Yahoo! Inc.GIPS' technology is particularly helpful when Internet conditions are not perfect for transporting voice. That, of course, is a good description of VoIP calls that travel through wifi hotspots. And voice over wifi looks like a hot area for iPhone business-application developers. Thus, the announcement that GIPS has developed an iPhone version of its voice engine (the company already had desktop, Symbian and Windows Mobile versions) is an especially good indication of the device's business-use potentialGIPS sees a number of ways that its technology could support business applications. According to the company's director of product management Dovid Coplon, a particularly promising area is so-called collaboration suites that provide various forms of communication and sharing among business users. Such suites typically allow users to send emails and instant messages, as well as share documents and views of their computer desktops online, through a unified interface.Voice communications would be a natural addition to such applications. And because the suites work over the Internet, GIPS voice engines could provide just the boost in sound quality that is necessary to make such voice-capable applications practical for everyday business use.
