About 5,000 police have been deployed to control a mass brawl among workers at a Foxconn plant in northern China.

Taiwan's Foxconn Technology Group, which assembles Apple iPhones and makes components for top global electronics companies, closed its Taiyuan plant in China after about 2,000 workers were involved in a brawl at a company dormitory.

It was not clear how long the shutdown would last at the plant, which employs about 79,000 people.

Police and company officials are investigating the cause of the disturbance.

Foxconn said the trouble started with a personal row that blew up into a brawl.

But some people posting messages on a microblog site said factory guards had beaten workers and that sparked the melee.

"The plant is closed today for investigation," Foxconn spokesman Louis Woo said.

An employee contacted by telephone said the closure could last two or three days.

Pictures from just outside the plant showed broken windows at a building by an entrance gate and a line of olive-coloured paramilitary police trucks parked inside the factory grounds.

The unrest is the latest in a string of incidents at plants run by Foxconn, the trading name of Hon Hai Precision Industry Co and the world's largest contract maker of electronic goods.

Drawing attention as a supplier and assembler for Apple products, the company has faced accusations of poor conditions and mistreatment of workers at its operations in China, where it employs about 1 million workers.

Foxconn said a personal brawl between two workers was behind the dispute, but comments posted online suggested security guards may have been to blame.

In a posting on the Chinese Twitter-like microblog site Sina Weibo, user Jo-Liang said that four or five security guards beat a worker almost to death.

Another user, Fan de Sa Hai, quoted a friend from Taiyuan as saying guards beat up two workers from Henan province and in response, other workers set bed quilts on fire and tossed them out of dormitory windows.

The accounts could not be independently confirmed.

Foxconn cited police as saying 40 people were taken to hospital and a number were arrested, while the state-run Xinhua news agency added that three people were in serious condition.

Calls to the Taiyuan police were not immediately answered, while an official at the plant declined to comment when reached by telephone.

"Clearly there is deep-seated frustration and anger among the employees and no outlet, apart from violence, for that frustration to be released," Geoff Crothall, communication director at China Labour Bulletin, a labour rights group in Hong Kong, said in a statement.

"There is no dialogue and no means of resolving disputes, no matter how minor. So it is not surprising when such disputes escalate into violence."

Foxconn does not confirm which of its plants supply Apple, but an employee said the Taiyuan plant is among those that assemble and make parts for Apple's iPhone 5.

In June, about 100 workers went on a rampage at a Foxconn plant in Chengdu, in south-western China.
