Samsung has lost the chance to show its latest tablet at one of the largest electronics shows after Apple won a second injunction blocking sales of the Galaxy Tab in Germany. According to BBC News, the new Galaxy Tab 7.7 has been pulled out of the IFA electronics fair in Berlin in light of a decision from a Dusseldorf court on Friday banning sales of the tablet in Germany.

The growing patent battle had resulted in a temporary ban on the Galaxy 10.1 Tab in Germany in August, as well as forcing a delayed release of the tablet in Australia. “Samsung respects the court’s decision… and therefore decided not to display any more the Galaxy Tab 7.7 in the IFA,” the company said in a statement.

Apple employees reportedly accompanied police officers as they searched a private residence in San Francisco in the hunt for the missing iPhone 5 prototype. After the prototype was left in a San Francisco bar late July, Apple has been working tirelessly to retrieve it, The International Business Times reports. Police issued a statement on Friday that they had traced the phone to a residence, and Apple employees accompanied them on the raid.

“The two Apple employees met with the resident and then went into the house to look for the lost item. The Apple employees did not find the lost item and left the house,” the police statement said. The homeowner, 22-year old Sergio Calderon, told SF Weekly that six people identifying themselves as San Francisco police officers searched his home in July, rifling through his belongings and computer. He also spoke of how he was “threatened” over the missing phone.

Google has said it is pulling the plug across a series of products as it refocuses itself on higher-margin offerings like search. According to CNET, 10 different businesses from desktop software to web security will be closed to allow Google to focus more on the markets with higher margins.

Google Senior Vice President Alan Eustace announced the news, describing it as “fall-spring cleaning.” Since Larry Page took over as chief executive in January, Google’s focus has shifted to streamlining its operations in order to raise profit margins. According to Eustace, the new cuts demonstrate this strategy in action.

“This will make things much simpler for our users, improving the overall Google experience,” Eustace wrote. “It will also mean we can devote more resources to high-impact products.”

Some of the businesses closing came from acquisitions, including Aardvark, which was bought in 2010 for a reported $50 million. Other closures include Fast Flip, Google Desktop, Sidewiki, Google Pack, Google Image Labeler and Google Web Security.
