As Hurricane Sandy barrels up the coast, many in the United States hope the storm veers right and heads “safely out to sea”, but for a few people, there is nothing safe about this possibility.

When a hurricane approaches port, ship captains must make hard decisions about speed and direction of approaching storms. The worst place for a ship to find itself is in the eye of a major hurricane, but the second worst place is the harbor.

“The term Safe Harbor doesn’t pertain to storms the size of Hurricane Sandy,” says Captain John Konrad, who has experienced hurricanes first hand. “The safest place for a ship is out to sea and as far away from the storm as possible.”

Ships are built with hardened steel, but if left tied up to the dock, they can be easily damaged as waves push them against concrete pilings.  If a ship were to break loose from the dock, it would turn into a floating wrecking ball.

For this reason, the United States Coast Guard recently closed most ports along the hurricane path and ordered all ships to leave port and head east at the best possible speed.

With top speeds ranging between 15 and 30 miles per hour, commercial ships don’t move very fast.  Their only hope is to leave early enough to cross ahead of the hurricane path, hoping they don’t get nailed by the storm. But this is not like a foolish teenager’s game of chicken with an approaching train.  Hurricanes do not move on tracks and even the smallest veering of a storm in the direction of the ocean (east) will cause ships to get caught in its destructive path.

“When battling a storm at sea, size and mass are your friend. Ships are built of heavy steel and designed to be capable of riding out most storms. ” says Konrad. “ Even the largest ships however, like the 1,302 foot long,  170,974 ton container ship, Emma Maersk, can sink if she is beaten by massive waves for too long a period of time. This is why shipping companies keep a close eye on their ships and the path of all developing storms”.

In the Copenhagen headquarters of Maersk, there is a room that looks more like a NASA control center than the offices of a major shipping company. Ship captains, meteorologists and executives sit behind banks of phones and computers while massive hurricane maps plotted with the location of every ship in the company’s fleet, are projected on the wall. Information from NOAA gets combined with weather data from the ships and experts in the movement of storms send alerts to each individual ship with guidance on the best route to take for avoiding the storm.

With new mega-ships costing hundreds of millions of dollars and with lives at stake, companies like Maersk spare no time or expense in providing weather advice and guidance to individual ship captains. But advice is all they can provide. “At the end of the day,” says Konrad, “the decision on where to pilot the ship is made by the ship captain. He is the person ultimately responsible for avoiding the storm.”

The following video is an interview with Steffen Conradsen, Head of Global Execution at Maersk Line, the world’s largest containership owner.  Conradsen gives us some insight into the decision-making process when ships encounter storms like Hurricane Sandy.

For more information, video and pictures of ships caught in the hurricane check out gCaptain.com‘s official shipping and transportation blog here on Forbes.

Hurricane Sandy: How do Maersk ships ride out the storm?
