In case you haven’t seen the news yet, earlier today, AMD made an announcement that represents a new era in the compute landscape and builds on our rich tradition of bringing disruptive technology to the data center. By announcing our intent to build 64-bit ARM technology-based server CPUs, AMD has embarked on a path that will effectively end the one size fits all compute era that has dominated the data center for the past two decades.

With the explosion of new devices and business models that touch the internet, the data center has now become the center of the universe.  New workloads are placing tremendous demands on the server infrastructure which is forcing the need for accelerating the pace of innovation.  The largest data centers in the world are adding compute at an extremely fast pace, and the market is looking for disruptive ways to improve the efficiency and reduce the total cost of ownership in the data center.

Small and efficient CPU, like ARM CPUs, bring a very unique capability to the data center.    The compute/$$ and compute/watt is substantially improved in ARM CPUs over large-core CPUs, thus making them ideal for highly parallelizable tasks.  However, the challenge with efficient CPUs is that they need to be linked to the network.   If each individual efficient CPU is linked to the network, it becomes a very inefficient way to operate.

This is where AMD can come in and can offer a unique advantage to drive the industry forward.   AMD, through our SeaMicro acquisition, has the industry’s premier fabric, the AMD SeaMicro Freedom™ fabric.  By using Freedom fabric to link ARM-based CPUs into a cluster, and then linking the clusters to the network, AMD can effectively solve the bottleneck of leveraging small, efficient CPUs in the mega data centers of tomorrow.

There are a number companies that have talked about 64-bit ARM in the server space but only AMD comes in with the background and expertise to drive and accelerate the ARM 64-bit ecosystem. We start with a deep knowledge of what it takes to be successful in servers; industry-leading 64-bit microprocessor technology, a broad portfolio of IP and the experience of working with OEMs, ODMs and ISVs to really deliver an enterprise-class portfolio of features. In fact, at our press event in San Francisco earlier today, we pulled together a panel of industry leaders from Facebook, Dell, Red Hat, Amazon and ARM to talk about this movement to more flexible and energy-efficient compute solutions and what was required to further drive this data center inflection point.

The best part of it is that we provide customers choice.  In addition to ARM-based CPUs, AMD will continue to offer x86 CPUs and APUs so that customers can use the right processor for the right workload.

We are extremely excited to be driving the industry at this key inflection point in the data center.  This is an exciting time to be in our industry and we look forward to partnering with the entire ecosystem to drive this disruptive change.

Take a look at the video here for highlights of today’s panel and event.

Lisa Su is senior vice president and general manager of AMD’s Global Business Units.Her postings are her own opinions and may not represent AMD’s positions, strategies or opinions. Links to third party sites, and references to third party trademarks, are provided for convenience and illustrative purposes only. Unless explicitly stated, AMD is not responsible for the contents of such links, and no third party endorsement of AMD or any of its products is implied.
