Even though House Speaker John Boehner (R-OH) has acknowledged that Obamacare is the “law of the land,” nine state lawmakers in Wisconsin are hoping to ensure that President Obama’s health reform law won’t ever be implemented in their state. The group of Tea Party-affiliated Republicans is backing a bill that would arrest any federal officials who attempt to implement Obamacare in Wisconsin.

The state officials responded to a survey from the right-wing advocacy group Campaign for Liberty to confirm they would support “legislation to nullify ObamaCare and authorize state and local law enforcement to arrest federal officials attempting to implement the unconstitutional health care scheme known as ObamaCare.” As the Journal Sentinel reports, the nine lawmakers who say they would back such a bill remain unconvinced of the health law’s constitutionality:

Rep. Chris Kapenga (R-Delafield) is one of the nine from Wisconsin who told the Campaign for Liberty he would back legislation to declare Obamacare illegal and allow police to arrest federal officials who take steps to implement it in Wisconsin. He said he believes the health care law is unconstitutional, despite the U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling that it passes constitutional muster. “Just because Obama was re-elected does not mean he’s above the constitution,” Kapenga said.

Another one of the state lawmakers who responded to Campaign for Liberty’s survey, Rep. Don Pridemore (R-Hartford), said he would also support legislation preventing his governor from setting up a health exchange in the state without first getting approval from the state legislature — similar to a ballot initiative that passed last week in Missouri. “That seems reasonable,” Pridemore told the Journal Sentinel. “It was making a statement to the federal government that we don’t want Obamacare.”

Under the health reform law, states that refuse to set up their own health insurance exchanges simply cede their control to the federal government, which will step in and set up an exchange for them.

The Campaign for Liberty promotes a “tenther” vision of the Constitution that would allow conservative states to reject federal laws they disagree with, though Wisconsin is still required to follow federal laws like Obamacare.
