Updates can now be found at the bottom of this post. 

Papa John Schnatter is no fan of Obamacare. The CEO of Papa John’s International has occasionally railed against the reform for months. Leading up to the election, he was a Mitt Romney supporter and fundraiser. Now that the election is over, he’s doubling down on his claim that the health care reform will force his company to increase pizza prices by 10-14 cents a pie. He estimates that Obamacare will end up costing his company $5-8 million annually.

The issue: the Affordable Care Act dictates that full-time employees (30 hours or more per week) at companies with more than 50 workers need to be provided health insurance. Schnatter has further claimed that some employers will cut employee hours to avoid providing them with healthcare.

His remarks have sparked anger on the internet, one thread on social news site Reddit, titled “There are plenty of places to get cheap s***** pizza in the world- Anyone else on reddit ready to boycott Papa John’s?” has captured more than 21,000 up-votes and 4,500 comments. A host of Facebook groups with the same idea have cropped up in the past 48 hours.

Meanwhile, shares in Papa John’s International have been tumbling since last Thursday, falling from $51.70 at market close Wednesday to $49.22 on Monday, a 4.2% drop.

Last year, Papa John’s International captured $1.218 billion in revenue. Total operating expenses were $1.131 billion. So if Schnatter’s math is accurate (Obamacare will cost his company $5-8 million more annually),  then new regulation translates into a .4% to .7% (yes, fractions of a percent) expense increase. It’s difficult to set that ratio against the proposed pie increase, given size and topping differentials, but many of their large specialty pizzas run for $16. Remarkably, a 10-14 cent increase on a $16 pizza falls in a comparable range: .6% to.9%. But the cost transference becomes less equitable if you’re looking at medium pizzas, which run closer to $12, meaning a .8% to 1.15% price increase.

For the sake of argument, let’s say that Papa John’s sells exactly half medium/half large specialty pizzas. Averaging the ranges for both sizes, then averaging that product yields a .86% price increase  — well outside the range of what Schnatter says Obamacare will cost him.

So how much would prices go up, under these 50/50 conditions, if they were to fairly reflect the increased cost of doing business onset by Obamacare? Roughly 3.4 to 4.6 cents a pie.

In September, the company announced that it would be giving away 2 million free pizzas. That was, of course, a promotion designed to increase brand awareness and to invite consumers to try the brand — with the ultimate goal of selling more pizzas. Those giveaways can’t really be cataloged alongside sales that would have been made otherwise. But just in case you’re curious, that would be the equivalent of $24 million to $32 million in pizza revenue.

Standing to lose (or gain) as his company determines how best to operate under new regulations is Papa Schnatter himself, who owns 6,094,409 shares, or nearly one fourth, of Papa John’s, according to the company’s most recent annual report. 1,268,052 of those shares are held in a family limited partnership and 84,000 shares held in a 501(c)(3). The rest are directly owned. At the $49.44 share price, subtracting those held in a charitable trust, the remaining 6,010,409 shares are worth roughly $297 million. Schnatter’s compensation packages for years 2009-11 were $2,319,643, $2,614,516, and $2,745,219 respectively, also according to the annual report. Papa John’s International has not paid a dividend since 2005.

Also hanging in the balance are the shares of institutional investors FMR (11.6%), BlackRock (6.7%) and JP Morgan Chase (5%). But if these notions of protest materialize, Papa John’s front line will be populated by the franchise owners who operate many of its 4,000-plus international locations.

Emails sent to Papa John’s Investor Relations and calls placed to Papa John’s Public Relations were not immediately returned for comment.

1. First of all, I’m really enjoying the spirited conversation on this post.

2. With regard to the pizza giveaways. These are not “lost revenue.” They are a marketing tactic designed by the company to bring more consumers to Papa John’s, with the end goal of selling more pizzas and generating more revenue. It is a strategic investment. Further, the cost of giving away a pizza is not equal to the market value of that pizza. I apologize if that was not made clear above.

3. Some seem to think my analysis suggests I don’t appreciate a business’s duty to shareholders to maximize value.  That is not in dispute. But (given the parameters I set up), using Schnatter’s figures, the costs his company will incur due to Obamacare are not equal to the pie increases he mentions. Those pie increases would more than make up for damage done to the company’s net income through increases to operational expenses. Of course, if he thinks it won’t harm the bottom line, he is absolutely allowed to increase prices further. Given inflation and expansion, his other expenses will obviously increase in the following years too. But attributing all price increases to Obamacare would be disingenuous.

4. In introducing the piece, I mentioned fledgling internet efforts to boycott Papa John’s. Now, counter-efforts are underway. Google “National Papa John’s Appreciation Day” to learn more.

5. Finally, I get the impression that Schnatter is attempting to communicate that there is no such thing as a free lunch, which is true. In the comments, many have mentioned that other companies will most likely need to increase prices in response to Obamacare. That is also true. The question that can’t be answered right now is: How will Schnatter’s open communication and politicization of price increases ultimately impact his company? Variables to consider: boycotts, counter-boycotts and shareholder perceptions of all the above. Previous case study: Chik-Fil-A.

You might also like…
