The United States presidential election of 2012 was the 57th quadrennial presidential election and took place on Tuesday, November 6, 2012. The Democratic nominee, President Barack Obama, and his running mate, Vice President Joe Biden, were elected to a second term. Their major challengers were the Republican nominee and former Massachusetts Governor Mitt Romney and his running mate, Representative Paul Ryan of Wisconsin.

Four major debates were held during the last weeks of the campaign: three presidential and one vice-presidential. Issues debated included the economy and jobs, the national deficit, social policy, immigration and foreign policy. Prior to the election, media outlets typically said the election was too close to predict in advance, although analysts using statistical models, bookmakers and betting markets had Obama as a clear favorite to win.

On November 6, by around 11:15 PM EST, most major television networks projected the winners would be President Obama and Vice President Biden. At about 1:00 AM EST (6:00 AM GMT) on November 7, Mitt Romney conceded the election to Barack Obama, just as the polls in Alaska were closing. Compared to the Republican John McCain's performance in the previous election, Romney gained the electoral votes of North Carolina, Indiana and Nebraska's 2nd congressional district – each of which had been narrowly won by Obama in 2008. As of Saturday, November 10, the electoral outcomes of all 50 states and the District of Columbia had been definitively projected, with final vote counts still outstanding in some states.

As specified in the Constitution, the 2012 presidential election coincided with the United States Senate elections where one-third of the Senators faced re-election (33 Class I seats), and the biennial United States House of Representatives elections to elect the members for the 113th Congress. Eleven gubernatorial elections and many elections for state legislatures also took place at the same time, as well as many local ballot initiatives.

The 2010 Census changed the Electoral College vote apportionment for the presidential elections from 2012 to 2020 in the states listed below.

Eight states (Arizona, Florida, Georgia, Nevada, South Carolina, Texas, Utah and Washington) gained votes, due to reapportionment based on the 2010 Census. Similarly ten states (Illinois, Iowa, Louisiana, Massachusetts, Michigan, Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Ohio and Pennsylvania) lost votes.

In the political climate of 2012, this gave the Democratic Party a net loss of six electoral votes in states won by Al Gore, John Kerry and Obama in the past three presidential elections, rendering the party a national total of 242. Conversely, the Republican Party achieved a net gain of six electoral votes in states won by George W. Bush and McCain] in the past three presidential elections, rendering the Republican Party a national total of 180. Votes allocated to remaining states (i.e., those where the majority voted for both Democratic and Republican candidates during the last three presidential elections) remain unchanged from the national total of 115.

In 2011, several state legislatures enacted new laws, particularly related to voter identification and electoral process, that were attacked by the Democratic Party as attempts to suppress voting among its supporters and to improve the Republican Party's presidential prospects. For some time, Republican supporters have been trying to make an issue of voter fraud, although their allegations have been repeatedly disproved. Florida, Georgia, Ohio Tennessee, and West Virginia state legislatures approved measures to shorten early voting periods. Florida and Iowa barred all felons from voting. Kansas, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Wisconsin state legislatures passed requiring voters to have government-issued IDs before they could cast their ballots. This meant, typically, that people without driver's licenses or passports had to gain new forms of ID. Obama, the NAACP, and the Democratic Party fought against many of the new state laws. Former President Bill Clinton denounced them, saying, "There has never been in my lifetime, since we got rid of the poll tax and all the Jim Crow burdens on voting, the determined effort to limit the franchise that we see today". He was referring to Jim Crow laws passed in southern states near the turn of the twentieth century that disfranchised most blacks from voting and excluded them from the political process for more than six decades. Clinton said the moves would effectively disfranchise core voter blocs that trend liberal, including college students, Blacks, and Latinos. Rolling Stone magazine criticized the American Legislative Exchange Council for lobbying in states to bring about these laws, to "solve" a problem that does not exist. The Obama campaign fought against the Ohio law, pushing for a petition and statewide referendum to repeal it in time for the 2012 election. Republicans claim they are trying to cut down on "voter fraud", although it has not been documented as a significant problem in any state.

In addition, the Pennsylvania legislature proposed a plan to change its representation in the electoral college from the traditional winner-take-all model to a district-by-district model. As the governorship and both houses of its legislature were Republican-controlled, and the move was viewed by some as an attempt to reduce Democratic chances.

With an incumbent president running for reelection against token opposition, the race for the Democratic nomination was largely uneventful. The nomination process consisted of primaries and caucuses, held by the 50 states, as well as Guam, Puerto Rico, Washington, D.C., U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands. Additionally, high-ranking party members known as superdelegates each received one vote in the convention. A few of the primary challengers surpassed the president's vote total in individual counties in several of the seven contested primaries, though none made a significant impact in the delegate count. Running unopposed everywhere else, President Obama cemented his status as the Democratic presumptive nominee on April 3, 2012 by securing the minimum number of pledged delegates needed to clinch the nomination.

The nomination process consisted of primaries and caucuses, held by the 50 states, as well as Guam, Puerto Rico, Washington, D.C., U.S. Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands. The caucuses allocated delegates to the respective state delegations to the national convention, but the actual election of the delegates were many times at a later date. Delegates were elected in different ways that vary from state to state. They could be elected at local conventions, selected from slates submitted by the candidates, selected at committee meetings, or elected directly at the caucuses and primaries. Additionally, high-ranking RNC members, known as superdelegates, each received one vote in the convention.

Candidates with considerable name recognition who entered the race for the Republican presidential nomination in the early stages of the primary campaign included: Congressman and former Libertarian nominee Ron Paul, former Governor Tim Pawlenty, who co-chaired John McCain's campaign in 2008, former Governor Mitt Romney, who was widely considered the runner-up for the nomination in the 2008 cycle, and former Speaker of the House Newt Gingrich.

The first debate took place on May 5, 2011 in Greenville, South Carolina, with businessman Herman Cain, former New Mexico Governor Gary Johnson, Paul, Pawlenty, and former Pennsylvania Senator Rick Santorum participating. There was another about a month later, with Gingrich, Romney, former Utah Governor Jon Huntsman and Rep. Michele Bachmann participating and Johnson excluded. A total of thirteen debates were held before the Iowa caucuses.

The first major event of the campaign was the Ames Straw Poll, which took place in Iowa on August 13, 2011. Pawlenty withdrew from the race after doing poorly, as did Thaddeus McCotter, the only candidate among those who qualified for the ballot who was refused entrance into the debate. Bachmann won the straw poll, and this proved to be the acme of her campaign.

A segment of the conservative primary electorate found Romney to be too liberal or moderate for their tastes, and a number of potential "anti-Romney" candidates were put forward, including Donald Trump, Sarah Palin, and Texas Governor Rick Perry, the last of whom ultimately decided to run. He did poorly in subsequent debates, and Cain and Gingrich came into the fore.

Due to a number of scandals, Cain withdrew just before the end of the year, after getting on the ballot in several states. Johnson, who had been able to get into only one other debate, withdrew in order to seek the Libertarian Party nomination.

For the first time in modern GOP history, three different candidates won the first three primary contests. Although Romney was thought to have won in Iowa and New Hampshire, Santorum was declared the winner (by 34 votes) in Iowa a few weeks after the caucuses. Gingrich won South Carolina by a large and surprising margin.

A number of candidates dropped out at this time. Bachmann, who finished fifth in Iowa, withdrew after the caucuses. Huntsman withdrew after coming in third in New Hampshire, and Perry withdrew when polls showed him drawing low numbers in South Carolina.

Santorum, who had previously run an essentially one-state campaign in Iowa, took his campaign national and carried three more states on February 7. Romney won all other contests after South Carolina, including Florida, seen at the time as a major win over Gingrich.

The Super Tuesday primaries took place on March 6. With ten states voting and 391 delegates being allocated, it had nearly half the potential impact of its 2008 predecessor. Romney carried six states and Santorum three, while Gingrich won only in his home state of Georgia. Throughout the rest of March, 266 delegates were allocated in 12 events, including all of the territorial contests and the first local conventions that allocated delegates (Wyoming's county conventions). Santorum won Kansas and three Southern primaries, but he was unable to make any gain on Romney, who remained the frontrunner after securing more than half of the delegates allocated in March.

On April 10, Santorum suspended his campaign, leaving Mitt Romney as the undisputed front-runner for the presidential nomination and Gingrich to claim he was the "last conservative" still actively campaigning for the nomination. Gingrich withdrew on May 1 after a spokesman announced on April 25 that he would do so. On the same day as Gingrich's spokesman announced his future withdrawal, the Republican National Committee (RNC) declared Romney the party's presumptive nominee. Paul officially remained in the race, but he stopped campaigning on May 14. On May 29, Romney won the Texas 2012 Republican primaries; the subsequent accumulation of the state's 155 delegates was enough for him to clinch the party's nomination.

On August 28, 2012, delegates at the Republican National Convention officially named Romney as the party's presidential nominee. Romney formally accepted the delegates' nomination on August 30, 2012.

Four other parties nominated candidates that had ballot access to 270 electoral votes, which is the minimum number needed to win the presidency through a majority of the electoral college.

Write-in states that were confirmed to have full elector slates, and included in the final ballot count, appear in bold.

Following the unsuccessful Unity08, Peter Ackerman started Americans Elect, a non-partisan non-profit organization, with the objective of having the first online nomination process in American history. Americans Elect's motto was "Pick a president, not a party". No candidates met the requirements of online support set out by the organization to enter into its online caucus, so on May 17 the primary process came to an end without a nominee and no AE candidate will run for President in 2012. The online caucus site is now inactive except for a home page with the phrase "See You in 2013".

A total of 417 people filed a Statement of Candidacy with the Federal Election Commission to run for President in 2012. Most did not appear on the ballot in any state in the general election on November 6.

The Commission on Presidential Debates held four debates. Candidates must appear on sufficient state-ballots to be mathematically eligible to win the presidency and achieve at least 15% support in five national polls as of the date of determination. Two third party candidates were organized by Free and Equal, and co-moderated by Christina Tobin.

An independent presidential debate featuring minor party candidates took place on Tuesday October 23, at University Club of Chicago in Chicago, Illinois. The debate was moderated by Larry King and organized by the Free and Equal Elections Foundation. Gary Johnson (Libertarian), Jill Stein (Green), Virgil Goode (Constitution) and Rocky Anderson (Justice) were the participants. A second debate between Stein and Johnson was announced for Monday, November 5, and took place in Washington, D.C.; it was hosted by RT, and moderated by Thom Hartmann and Christina Tobin.

Early voting in some of the states began in September or October and continued as late as November 5. The election will proceed as follows:

The first results available were from Dixville Notch, New Hampshire, with 5 votes for Obama and 5 for Romney, and from Hart's Location, New Hampshire, with 23 votes for Obama, nine for Romney, and one for Gary Johnson. Both towns vote at midnight each election, and results are available shortly thereafter. Additional results became available after the polls closed, beginning at 7 PM Eastern Time.

There were several firsts this election. For the first time, a sitting President voted early. For the first time, candidates spent over $1 billion in advertising. Total cost in all campaigns was close to $5.8 billion, about $50/voter. Two astronauts on the International Space Station voted from space using ballots which were transmitted to them over the weekend.

For the first time, voters in New Jersey were permitted to vote using e-mail. Election officials were not prepared for the 15 minutes it took to validate each request. As a result, they extended e-mail voting until Friday, November 9.

Popular vote count is preliminary. Many states will not certify their results until late November or early December.

The election of 2012 marks the first time since 1820 that three consecutive American presidents have achieved re-election, as well as the first time since 1944 and Franklin D. Roosevelt's re-election that a Democratic presidential candidate has succeeded in winning a majority of the popular vote in two consecutive elections. Third-party voting was not significant. Only three candidates of the modern Democratic party have secured a majority of the popular vote in consecutive elections: Andrew Jackson, Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and Barack Obama. Before Obama in 2012, Ronald Reagan was the last president to win 50% or more of the popular vote in consecutive presidential elections. In addition he is the only one of the three sitting U.S. Senators elected president who later won reelection, the others, Warren G. Harding and John F. Kennedy died in office during their first terms.

In the election of 2012, two states switched their presidential vote in comparison to the last election: Indiana and North Carolina. In addition, Romney won Nebraska's 2nd congressional district, which Obama won in 2008. All of the other states carried by Obama in 2008 remained in his column. In American history, there has been only one other contested re-election campaign that saw only two states switch sides, the election of 1888, in which Indiana and New York moved from the Democratic column to the Republican column to deny Grover Cleveland re-election in favor of Benjamin Harrison. Obama became only the second Democrat (after Bill Clinton) to win the White House without winning North Carolina.

1 Maine and Nebraska each allow for their electoral votes to be split between candidates. In the 2012 election, all four of Maine's electoral votes were won by Obama and all five of Nebraska's electoral votes were won by Romney.

Red font color denotes states won by Republican Mitt Romney; blue denotes those won by Democrat Barack Obama.

States/districts where the margin of victory was under 5% (84 electoral votes):

States/districts where margin of victory was more than 5% but less than 10% (103 electoral votes):

After the networks called Ohio for Barack Obama, Mitt Romney was at first reluctant to concede the race, as many counties in Ohio were still outstanding. Once Colorado was called for the President, however, in tandem with Obama's apparent lead in Florida, Romney realized he had lost and conceded. Despite public polling suggesting Romney was behind in the swing states, his campaign was genuinely surprised by the loss, having believed that public polling was oversampling Democrats. One factor was a disorganization in getting voters to the polls, in project Orca. The Romney campaign had already set up a transition website, and had scheduled and purchased a fireworks display to celebrate his expected victory.

Financial markets, the media and other countries' political leaderships reacted with both positive and mixed messages. Most world leaders congratulated and praised Barack Obama on his re-election victory; however, Venezuela and some other states had tempered reactions; Pakistan commented that Romney's defeat made Pakistan-United States relations more safe. Notably, international reactions came from Kenya, where Sarah Obama led the celebration. Global stock markets fell noticeably after the President's re-election. Specifically, the Dow Jones Industrial Average, NASDAQ and S&P 500 all fell over two percent the day after the election. Reasons given for the sharp drop were the potential "fiscal cliff" looming over the United States, because of a split Congress; in addition, speculators are hedging on differences between the Executive and the House of Representatives as a result of differing political control of each institution. They also have renewed concerns about Europe's debt crisis following warnings given by the European Central Bank's President.
