Hi I'm Bill O'Reilly thanks for watching us tonight the far left running wild that is the subject of this evening's talking points memo flush.

Far left elements in America are pump -- it up.

Today a number of leftists met with the president at the White House they included much of the union leaders -- from move on.

You don't get more left wing then the crew that visited the White House this morning.

The president of course thanking them for their loyalty during the campaign but -- Obama should have included some far left media folks at group totally in the tank for him.

On election night before most returns were and I said that's.

Whereby twenty years ago pres Obama wouldn't roundly defeated by an establishment candidate like Mitt Romney it's.

Is now the minority.

And the voters many of them feel that did this economic system is stacked against them and they want stuff.

Really see a tremendous Hispanic vote for President Obama.

Overwhelming black vote for -- Obama and women will probably break -- Obama's way.

Oh wow my announces was a 100% correct.

In fact the factors entire coverage of the campaign -- accurate right down to not making a prediction.

Because so many things are happening at the last minute.

Now thirty minutes after I made those remarks which were -- a matter of fact.

The far left website -- to crank on -- Centers reporting what I said they spun it describing my remarks as Morton.

-- man it was the word to use I was lamenting.

Quickly Meredith Blake -- totally incompetent reporter at the LA times pick that up also using the word.

Lot of men in her article but also adding that I seem quote.

Yeah I seem terrifying to you.

Not writing in variety said quote host like Bill O'Reilly loud men thing.

The shift in the US electorate.

And the lamenting went on -- article after article after article falsely claiming that I was somehow.

Wringing my hands rather than stating stage opinion.

The America's change it is no longer in the controlled Obama white power plant it never really has been it's been a false power in this country.

Was found it by Latin people.

So now -- white power guy I went from analyzing the election vote matter of factly to being David duke.

Isn't that nice and this happens all day every day in the far left media.

And it's get serious.

The Obama campaign demonize Mitt Romney as a predatory capitalist as a heartless man who even participated.

In the death of an innocent woman.

These people have -- not.

But the worst part about it is no one holds them accountable because most people fear the far left.

They're afraid of them because they are so vicious.

So here's what I really -- meant.

We're now living in a dishonest culture the media is wholly corrupt in this country it does things that it could never gotten away with even ten years ago.

There are entire media operations that exists solely to promote I don't.

That is getting worse.

And -- Now who.
