It's not just that Evangelicals' message is flawed.  It's that the religious right's theology and morality are downright pernicious, and America has had enough.

This post is a different perspective on the issues raised in a series of diaries about the future of the religious right.  Credit to Killer of Sacred Cows, Thresholder, and Pragmaticidealist (as of 10PM Saturday night, and there may be some I've missed).

Since there is no controversy about science & rationalism on the left, this post primiarily addresses the issue of religion.  

Fundamentally the issue is not about "religion vs. secularism."  It's about an evil perversion of religion that has set itself against not only secular philosophies, but also against core American values, and against other religions, and against the manifest realities of our time.  

At its root, the religious right's theology and morality are based on hatred, domination, and triumphalism.  

The term "dominionism" is spot-on: it describes the ideology of a self-selected group that seeks to impose its will upon others without restraint.  This is not only un-American, it's bad religion.  

We as a people pride ourselves on religious freedom including the freedom to have no religion, and we are generally uncomfortable passing judgement on the relgions of others.  However there is one type of religious freedom we reject: the "freedom" to take away the freedom of others who believe differently.  

From that starting-point, a majority of Americans (judging from election outcomes) has become fed up with the antics of the religious right: initially, fed up with its obsession with taking away the freedom of others; and finally, fed up with its entire set of premises.    

What America has begun to reject:

Theology based on the notion that one's alrightness with the universe (salvation, destination in the hypothetical hereafter, etc.) depends upon belief alone, or upon some kind of predestination, irrespective of whether one's actions in this life are altruistic, selfish, or overtly cruel.

Morality that obsesses about "the sins of the flesh" while turning a blind eye toward "the sins of the market," to the extent of obsessing about sex, embracing overt cruelty toward "the least among us," and flattering wealth and power for their own sake.  

Epistemology that closed at some point between the Bronze Age and the Middle Ages, while hypocritically making use of modern knowledge for wholly selfish ends.

Ontology that is so stubbornly at odds with reality that it conjures up the cosmic paranoia of divine deception to fill in for its blatant self-contradictions.

An emotional repertoire based upon hatred, supremacy, the will to power, the eager use of aggression, and the attitude of smugness toward the powerless.  

The evil social darwinism of "you're on your own, bub," with its concomitant "devil take the hindmost," another cleverly inserted meme from the plutocrats to the theocrats.

What we reject most of all is the notion that a narrow slice of our society has any right to impose its will upon others without restraint, reflection, or regret, and without the slightest checks and balances.  

What we have begun to embrace:

The belief that actions matter, and that one's alrightness with the universe depends in large measure on how one behaves toward others, particularly toward others who are powerless.

Morality that is concerned with how people treat each other, that links power to responsibility, links privilege to obligation, and makes no exceptions for the marketplace or the chambers of government.  

Epistemology that values scientific method, sound reasoning, and the public nature of knowledge; and that recognizes freedom of conscience in the search for wisdom.

Ontology that is grounded in reality and in a psychologically healthy appraisal of reality (e.g. no cosmic paranoia), and that recognizes the fact that our knowledge of nature at-large and of our own nature is still in its earliest stages with far more yet to be discovered.  

An emotional repertoire based on mutual respect, the dignity of all people, the spirit of service, compassion toward others, and an attitude of humility about power.

A social ethic based on the premise that "we're all in this together."  
