Republican attorneys have filed a court motion in southern Arizona to halt the counting of some 130 ballots in Congressional District 2, where GOP candidate Martha McSally fights to gain an edge over opponent Rep. Ron Barber, D-Ariz.

The race has remained too close to call as the counties continue to count early and provisional ballots.

A GOP spokesman said the lawsuit is designed to prevent “fraud and ballot tampering.” Barber’s campaign has objected to the court effort, warning it will disenfranchise voters and noting at least one precinct is majority Latino.

Attorneys argued the case in court Tuesday morning and were scheduled to meet again before the judge at 2:30 p.m. Tuesday. Presiding Judge Wallace Hoggatt is expected to rule in the afternoon.

The motion, filed Tuesday morning by Republican attorneys Eric Spencer and Michael Liburdi on behalf of a voter, claims that election workers did not properly seal and mark 130 provisional ballots in three precincts in Cochise County. One of those ballots recently went missing from the county recorder’s office, the motion alleged.

In addition, the filing said that according to the elections director, one or more workers reached inside the unsealed and unmarked envelopes, pulled out the “tracking forms” that had not been placed on the envelopes and affixed them to mark the envelopes without alerting political party officials, who are allowed to monitor the counting process.

The Republican attorneys, from Snell and Wilmer in Phoenix, said those votes should not be counted and asked the court to order election officials to set them aside.

“Because of the risk of compromised ballots, they simply cannot be counted,” the motion states.

The legal move demonstrates just how down-to-the-wire Arizona’s last undecided race for Congress has become. McSally and Barber have traded leads of as small as a few dozen votes since Election Day in the Tucson-based race.

McSally campaign spokesman Yancy Williams said the attorneys have been helpful to her campaign and observed the ballot counting for the campaign, but are not paid by her campaign. He noted McSally is not a party to the lawsuit.

National Republican Congressional Committee spokesman Daniel Scarpinato said in a statement that the party wants to make sure the law is followed and the rights of voters are preserved.

“We believe that every voter has the right to an election that is free of fraud and ballot tampering,” Scarpinato said. “Southern Arizonans expect that their will is not diluted by fraudulent ballots.”

Among other points, the attorneys argued state election law does not require envelopes to be sealed before counting. If the ballots are counted, there is no “irreparable harm” because the voter or campaign can bring an elections challenge, said Barber attorney Dan Barr.

Barber campaign manager Jessica Floyd said in a statement that the campaign respects the ballot-counting process and wants it to move forward.

“The request for a temporary restraining order filed today is an active attempt by Martha McSally’s attorneys to disenfranchise voters in Cochise County,” she said. “Throwing away the votes of southern Arizonans is wrong and unacceptable.”

In an e-mail response, Cochise County Elections Director Juanita Murray deferred any questions to the County Attorney’s Office. Calls for comment to the attorney’s office and County Recorder Christine Rhodes were not immediately returned.
