In ironic news today: Petitions began popping up after President Obama won over Republican candidate Mitt Romney. All the states petitioning to secede from the United States that obtained enough signatures to elicit a response from the White House — with the exception of Alabama — were some of the largest recipients of federal funding in 2010.

Census records show that six of the seven states that amassed more than 25,000 signatures on their petitions to form independent nations in the past week took more than $10 million in revenue from the federal government that year. The seven states – Texas, Florida, Louisiana, Alabama, Georgia, Tennessee and North Carolina – took more than 23 percent of all federal revenue allotted to the states that year. Missouri also received $11 million and has collected more than 29,500 signatures, but the electronic votes are divided between two identical petitions, disqualifying the state from receiving a White House response.

Those same states also rate as having the highest percentage in income inequality according to a new reportreleased today. 

Let’s just look at one of them.  Ah hell, let’s go for two.

The average drop in incomes among the bottom 20 percent of households over the last decade went down by 10 percent, while higher earners — the richest 5 percent of households  – have average incomes 14.3 times as large as the bottom 20 percent of households and 4.8 times as large as the middle 20 percent of households.

While the poorest households have seen no change in income — after decades of widening inequality, Louisiana’s richest households have dramatically bigger incomes than its poorest households.

The richest 5 percent of households have average incomes 14.1 times as large as the bottom 20 percent of households and 4.5 times as large as the middle 20 percent of households.

According to the report, and via dialogue during a conference call in which FreakOutNation participated in, the study’s analysts conclude that the jaw dropping disparity between the classes can be remedied.

As reported here, the amount of revenue the states pull in can effect income inequality. In bad times, they tend to raise sales tax. Revenues are still 6% below recession levels. Once we see revenue, income taxes will be cut. By preserving progressive taxes, we can restore services. Maryland raised their taxes to aid education funding. Compare to Kansas, which afforded a large tax cut.

Workers: Assistance for job care, health insurance. When workers via the Affordable health care Act have access to health care, they are more productive.

All states face growing inequality. Governors and legislators, can help their states grow. Education, indexing minimum wage, etc.

In short, that evil Socialist faction that they hate — which they deem as Socialism — could save these states from further disparity.  Adjusting minimum wage automatically — the same minimum wage which some Republicans would want to eradicate completely — could turn them around. But, go on, secede — just pay us the money you’ve been afforded through federal dollars first, mmkay?
