see more posts by Adalia Woodbury

According to Talking Points Memo, three Democratic Members of the House of Representatives asked Eric Holder to order an investigation into alleged tampering in voter registration drives by Strategic Allied Consulting and Pinpoint. Both companies are owned by Republican operative Nathan Sproul and both companies were hired by the RNC.

Reps. Jim Moran, Bobby Scott and Gerry Connolly, all of Virginia, wrote a letter to the Attorney-General which says in part:

Our inquiry is prompted by the recent media reports that an employee of Pinpoint, a subsidiary of Strategic Allied Consulting, was charged in Rockingham County, Virginia with 13 counts of destruction of voter registration applications, disclosure of voter registration information, and obstruction of justice. We note that in addition to its Rockingham County operation, Pinpoint is reportedly operating in at least five other jurisdictions in Virginia: Chesapeake City, Fairfax County, Prince William County, Loudoun County, and Virginia Beach. We also note that prior to drawing a paycheck from Pinpoint, the charged individual was under the direct employ of Strategic Allied Consulting. As you are aware, Strategic Allied Consulting is currently under investigation by the Florida Department of Law Enforcement and faces more than 200 allegations of voter registration fraud including registration of the deceased. Allegations of voter registration fraud by Strategic Allied Consulting also have been raised in Arizona and Colorado. The number of allegations in a multitude of locations would seem to suggest something more than the isolated acts of “a few bad apples.

The Department of Justice reportedly acknowledges receiving the letter, but has no comment at this time.

NBC reports “Virginia Attorney General Ken Cuccinelli said in a letter Monday that his ‘hands are tied’ and that he could not launch an investigation into the alleged destruction of voter registration forms without a formal request from one of three sources: the State Board of Elections, a local commonwealth’s attorney or a local electoral board member.”

We also know that the official in the impacted county doesn’t believe when an individual employed by a Republican strategist and dumps Democrats’ registration forms that it could be politically motivated.

We do know that the RNC paid Sproul’s companies millions of dollars for their services. We also know, according to Sproul, the RNC requested that he establish a new company given the political baggage from his services in previous elections.

Finally, we know that the RNC ordered State level officials to hire Sproul’s companies.

As I reported previously, State officials in Florida and Virginiaare reluctant to investigate the alleged election fraud occurring in their states. It’s time for the DOJ to step in and get to the bottom of this attack on our electoral system.
