Last week’s Republican bloodbath is causing angst in a series of House leadership elections.

The GOP’s problems with women — laid bare by last week’s elections — is the main undertone in the battle for head of the Homeland Security Committee between Reps. Mike Rogers of Alabama and Candice Miller of Michigan. That race, combined with the contest for head of the Republican Conference, is becoming a proxy for a larger discussion about a dearth of Republican women in power in the House.

(Also on POLITICO: Full coverage of the war over the future of the GOP)

To a person, key Republicans privately concede that Rogers has done everything right to become chairman. The same people also say Miller is likely to get the gavel. If so, she would be the only woman to chair a committee.

“They don’t have to pick me just because I’m a woman,” Miller said in an interview with POLITICO. “I would tell you this, if my name was Bob Miller, we wouldn’t even be having this conversation.” She said she thinks she would have it locked up already.

Another complication for leaders is Rep. Paul Ryan’s return to the House. Leaders are expected to reappoint the Wisconsin Republican as head of the Budget Committee even though he’s reached the term limit for committee heads. That has others wondering why the party’s golden boy is getting special treatment.

(Also on POLITICO: 2016 hangs over Paul Ryan's return)

“I have told John Boehner that I will abide by what John wants,” Homeland Security Chairman Pete King (R-N.Y.) told POLITICO. “I was told that nobody would be getting waivers, including Paul Ryan. Obviously, if Paul is going to get a waiver, I will discuss it with the speaker.”

House leadership elections and the selection of committee heads are always unseemly affairs. They pit friends against friends and force leadership to work back channels to boost the candidates of their choice.

This year is not the worst by any means. But the tensions speak to larger questions being asked in Republican politics — like about the lack of minorities in top positions.

For example, there are no Hispanics in leadership and one African-American — Rep. Tim Scott of South Carolina, who will be the only African-American Republican in Congress after the defeat of Florida Rep. Allen West, who has yet to concede.

In the race for the head of the Republican Conference, Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers of Washington state is trying to fend off Georgia Rep. Tom Price to remain the only woman in a top leadership spot. Republican leaders are confident McMorris Rodgers will win —they haven’t endorsed her, but some are quietly working to keep apprised of the race. McMorris Rodgers’s allies, both inside and outside leadership, want to see her battle it out with Price to show her internal strength.
