— Democrat Joe Donnelly is surging ahead in Indiana’s U.S. Senate race on the heels of Republican Richard Mourdock’s remark that pregnancies caused by rape are “something that God intended to happen,” a new poll shows.

The Howey/DePauw Indiana Battleground Poll, released Friday, found that 47 percent of Hoosiers are supporting Donnelly, compared to 36 percent for Mourdock and 6 percent for Libertarian Anderw Horning.

The 11 percentage-point lead for Donnelly is built on clear advantages among independent voters and women, as well as bleeding support for Mourdock among Republicans that supported U.S. Sen. Richard Lugar and those who live in the “doughnut counties” around Indianapolis.

The survey of 800 likely voters was conducted Oct. 28-30 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.5 percentage points for each candidate. It was a joint effort of two respected Indiana pollsters – Republican Christine Matthews, whose client list includes Gov. Mitch Daniels, and Democrat Fred Yang, who has worked for the state party.

“It’s all over but the crying. Joe Donnelly is poised to succeed Republican Sen. Richard Lugar in the U.S. Senate,” Matthews wrote in Friday’s edition of Howey Politics Indiana.

“Indiana has a healthy tradition of ticket-splitting at the state level and even this year when Mitt Romney will handily defeat Barack Obama in the state and Mike Pence will nearly certainly be elected governor, voters are deciding the Senate race independently. Nearly one in six voters support Romney but do not support Mourdock,” she wrote.

Mourdock’s campaign called the poll “silly” and said its respondents looked too much like the 2008 makeup of Indiana’s electorate to be accurate. It released an internal poll – its third in the last week – showing Mourdock ahead, 46 to 44 percent.

Mourdock pollster John McLaughlin said there’s no doubt Mourdock was hobbled by his comments on rape and abortion, but said he’s found an uptick in the state treasurer’s numbers during the polls he has conducted in recent days.

“They’ve since been recovering mainly since last Friday, and Sunday, Monday of this week, to the point where we’re picking up undecided voters,” McLaughlin said, adding that Mourdock is gaining support from energized opponents of abortion rights.

“That’s where we started picking up our vote again – with those pro-life conservatives, and they’re not just Republicans, they’re independent voters,” he said.

Democrats pointed to problems with that Mourdock survey – 56 percent of its respondents are over the age of 55, for example – and Donnelly’s campaign said the Howey/DePauw poll is a more accurate snapshot of the race.

“It is clear voters are rejecting Richard Mourdock’s ‘my way or the highway’ approach to politics and responding to Joe's message of Hoosier common sense,” said Donnelly spokeswoman Elizabeth Shappell.

The Howey/DePauw Indiana Battleground Poll contained several numbers that – if accurate – are toxic to Mourdock’s candidacy.

He is supported by only 70 percent of Republicans, an indication that wounds left after the bruising primary battle with six-term U.S. Sen. Richard Lugar never healed.

His controversial remarks on rape and abortion caught the attention of 87 percent of the likely voters who were surveyed, with 40 percent saying it makes them less likely to support Mourdock and only 6 percent saying they’d be more likely to back him.

Among independents, who had split evenly in a late-September version of the Howey/DePauw Indiana Battleground Poll, Donnelly is now winning by a three-to-one margin, 51 percent to 17 percent.

And women now favor Donnelly by an 18 percentage-point margin, 50 to 32 percent – three times the gap that existed in the September poll.

Mourdock’s campaign said it will continue to pound the message that a vote for Donnelly is a vote to advance the national Democratic agenda.

“Richard Mourdock remains committed to talking about serious issues that matter to Hoosier families: repealing ‘Obamacare,’ lowering taxes, decreasing government waste and keeping Harry Reid from controlling a Senate that hasn't passed a budget in three-and-a-half years,” said Mourdock spokesman Christopher Conner.

However, the Howey/DePauw poll found that Mourdock’s message “that Joe Donnelly is a Democrat who usually votes the party line on key issues” concerns just 32 percent of likely voters the most, compared to 42 percent most concerned “that Richard Mourdock is a Republican who rejects compromise.”

Yang, the Democratic pollster, wrote Friday in Howey Politics Indiana that the outcome to expect is clear. “Joe Donnelly is likely to win next Tuesday,” he wrote, “and probably the only ‘suspense’ will be his margin of victory.”

The same Howey/DePauw Indiana Battleground Poll found that Republican challenger Mitt Romney is leading President Barack Obama by a 51 to 41 margin in Indiana – a 10-point gap that many Republicans expect will be higher on Election Day.

It also found that in Indiana’s race for governor, Republican U.S. Rep. Mike Pence is drawing 47 percent support to Democratic former Indiana House Speaker John Gregg’s 40 percent and Libertarian Rupert Boneham’s 5 percent.

Those numbers fall between two internal polls released by the campaigns this week. Pence’s internal survey found him leading 46 percent to 37 percent, while Gregg’s, which did not include Boneham, had him down by just three points.

In state Superintendent of Public Instruction Tony Bennett’s re-election bid, the Howey/DePauw poll found that the Republican is drawing 40 percent backing compared to 36 percent for his Democratic challenger, Glenda Ritz.
