[View the story "13 things that would have passed the last Senate if there were no filibuster" on Storify]

The filibuster in recent years has allowed the Senate minority to block routine legislation by requiring 60 votes to end debate. Here are 13 significant bills or nominations that received more than 50 votes — a majority — but failed to overcome the 60-vote filibuster. 

That does not mean these bills would have all become law. They would still have had to pass the House and be signed by the president. However, passing the upper chamber would have put more pressure on the House to act in some cases.  

would have prevented the EPA from doing so After climate change legislation stalled in Congress, the Environmental Protection Agency declared it would use existing air pollution regulations to address greenhouse gas emissions. This bill would have prevented the EPA from doing so . If it were subjected to a majority vote and tied at 50-50, however, Vice President Joe Biden would have been allowed to vote and he presumably would have voted against it.

Republicans objected to his harsh criticism Goodwin Liu, a law professor at the University of California at Berkeley and former law clerk for Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, was nominated for an appeals court by President Obama. But Republicans objected to his harsh criticism of justices Samuel Alito and John Roberts during their confirmations.

The package failed In an effort to boost the economy in 2011, President Obama proposed a package of measures that would spend money on infrastructure and help state and local governments hire more teachers and police officers, among other things. The package failed , as did several of its components when brought up separately.

$30 billion in grants President Obama proposed giving $30 billion in grants to state and local governments for hiring (or keeping) school teachers and $5 billion for more police officers and emergency personnel as part of a broad jobs package.

through a recess appointment When President Obama couldn’t get Elizabeth Warren through the Senate to head the newly created Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, he nominated former Ohio Attorney General Richard Cordray instead. After Republicans filibustered Cordray, Obama named him through a recess appointment  that doesn’t last as long as a Senate-approved appointment.

would have allowed The U.S. Postal Service has faced mounting financial troubles because of increased use of the Internet. This bill would have allowed it to restructure retirement accounts to recoup $11 billion and use some of that money to encourage 100,000 postal workers to retire.

repeal some tax breaks This bill would repeal some tax breaks for large oil companies and use the money generated to pay for the extension of renewable energy tax credits and incentives.

would have expanded that People who discover that their employers have not paid them fairly because of gender discrimination can currently receive back pay if they win a civil lawsuit. This bill would have expanded that to allow them to sue for punitive damages as well.
