ARVADA, Colo. – Vice President Joe Biden reminded the crowd here Saturday to remember to set their clocks back, and joked that it's an act the Republican presidential candidate enjoys.

"Folks, I want to remind you: This is the end of Daylight Saving Time tonight," Biden said here at a midday rally in a high school auditorium. "It's Mitt Romney's favorite time of the year because he gets to turn the clock back."

"He wants to turn back that clock so desperately -- this time he can really do it, tonight it happens," he added. "I'm going to get in trouble, but I tell you, man."

Biden's joke came at the start of his third-to-last day of campaigning, which he is spending in Colorado before flying to Ohio for a three-rally day there Sunday.

To a crowd of 900 in the Arvada West High School auditorium, Biden showed some enthusiasm about the waning days of the campaign. 

"I am so ready to win this election, man," he said. "If you have an absentee ballot here in Colorado and you haven't mailed it in yet, it's too late to mail it, so you need to carry it in .... Don't mail it, it ain't gonna get there. And we need you."

The vice president was emotional early on in his speech, as he thanked the Vietnam veteran who introduced him, Steve Simmons, for serving.

"You're looking at a hero here, man," Biden said of Simmons, who had "Agent Orange rain down on him."

"Because of guys like you, the president and I -- and everyone decided -- we're never again gonna do ... to veterans who fought for America what happened to Vietnam veterans," he said. "That's why I'm so proud to serve with the president."

Biden also continued to criticize the Romney campaign's continued airing of an ad suggesting that the Obama adinistration's policies had forced Jeep manufacturing out of Ohio and to China. "There is one tweet I cannot repeat," he said, but "it was more than 'malarkey.'"

He also described the ad as "callous," because "it preys on the fears of people who are just getting back on their feet."
