[Look for your weekly fix from the one and only Henry Rollins right here on West Coast Sound every Thursday, and come back tomorrow for the awesomely annotated playlist for his Saturday KCRW broadcast.]

I am in Washington DC right now. The time before the winner of the presidency was announced was peppered with joyful moments. Akin gone, Mourdock done, Walsh finished, Scott Brown will be pulling Elizabeth Warren's shoe out of his ass for weeks to come. George Allen conceding in real time was better than pizza. All evening long, I had been sitting on the same couch I was four years ago when Mr. Obama won against John McCain.

See also: Henry Rollins: The Column! Occupy America

At 2315 hrs. the screen cut to Chicago and a sea of people going absolutely apeshit and suddenly, it was over. I must admit, I truly enjoyed the electoral college track up to 270 for our president. As much as I was happy that the president gets another four years, I was happier that Mitt Romney can have less opportunities to lower the bar.

I am not one to gloat nor am I one to run around yelling that I won something when an election goes my way. It is actually more a feeling of relief than anything else. I consider what could have been and think to myself that we all are better off for what happened. I noticed that underneath articles I read online where people post their sentiments, there seemed to be a foaming at the mouth jock mentality amongst those who cast their vote for Mitt Romney. "You libtards are gonna get crushed!" and other predictions occurred frequently. I wondered what they meant by that. Presumably, their man Mitt was going to create a bunch of jobs, slash the deficit and make Americans safe not only inside their own country but all over the world. I would hate to see a bunch of people getting crushed.

Perhaps they were merely going by what Mr. Romney promised to do on the first day of his administration. Presumably, on this miraculous day, the man would have been a blur of activity, where he magically took the power of the other two branches of government; the legislative and the judicial and in a few fell swoops and slashes of his mighty pen, overturned Roe v. Wade, defunded Planned Parenthood and decimated Obamacare. That would have indeed been a good bit of crushing. The irony of the amount of people who voted for Romney who would be negatively impacted by this is incredible. But thankfully it was not to be. Enough Americans saw fit to give president Obama a second term. I don't think there will be many people keeping their Romney/Ryan bumper stickers on their cars.
