George McGovern flew 35 combat missions piloting a B-24 Liberator in World War II, but the greatest flak he endured came decades later as a senator opposing the Vietnam War and 1972 Democratic nominee challenging the "dirty tricks" White House of President Richard Nixon.

The good life of the teacher, politician, peace and nutrition advocate ended peacefully Sunday at the age of 90 in South Dakota.

McGovern died at 5:15 a.m. at a Sioux Falls hospice, family spokesman Steve Hildebrand told The Associated Press. McGovern's family had said late last week that McGovern had become unresponsive while in hospice care, and Hildebrand said he was surrounded by family and lifelong friends when he died.

"We are blessed to know that our father lived a long, successful and productive life advocating for the hungry, being a progressive voice for millions and fighting for peace. He continued giving speeches, writing and advising all the way up to and past his 90th birthday, which he celebrated this summer," the family said in the statement.

A funeral will be held in Sioux Falls, with details announced shortly, Hildebrand said.

We'll remember George McGovern in these parts.

McGovern and Washington's hawkish Sen. Henry Jackson were the yin and yang of the Democratic Party in the 1960s and 1970s.  After McGovern defeated him for the 1972 presidential nomination, Jackson was dragooned into introducing his colleague at a packed rally held at the Seattle Center Arena.

And McGovern had a peacemaking link to the Northwest.  He sponsored, with Oregon's Republican Sen. Mark Hatfield, an amendment to cut off money for fighting the Vietnam War, aimed at ending U.S. involvement by 1970.  It lost in a 55-39 Senate vote.

During floor debate, a passionate McGovern declared:  "This chamber reeks of blood."

McGovern will be remembered for his challenges, not only to Nixon but also to the "old bulls" who ran the Senate.

Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman John Stennis talked of sending U.S. troops back into Cambodia.  McGovern shot back:  "I'm tired of old men dreaming up wars for young men to fight. If he wants to use American ground troops in Cambodia, let him lead the charge himself."

McGovern experienced war, under fire over Nazi-occupied Europe in World War II.  He earned a Distinguished Flying Cross for crash-landing his damaged Liberator, the Dakota Queen II, on an island in the Adriatic.

He went back to teaching after World War II, flirted with the radical-left Henry Wallace campaign in 1948,  then built the Democratic Party in South Dakota.  He served two terms in Congress and was President Kennedy's inaugural Food for Peace director in the early 1960s.

McGovern started speaking against the Vietnam involvement in 1963 and opposed the war from the start. 

He was to incur the wrath of Washington, D.C., warriors who never went near a battlefield.  Ex-House Speaker Newt Gingrich, he of multiple deferments, labeled Bill and Hillary Clinton as "McGoverniks" because they worked for McGovern in 1972.  In his 80s, he became a whipping boy for the "neo-cons," right-wing intellectuals who championed the U.S. pre-emptive war in Iraq.

McGovern came from far back to win the 1972 nomination.  He was nominated at a chaotic Democratic convention, delays forcing him to deliver his acceptance speech ("Come Home America!") far into the night.

He made a disastrous pick for vice president.  Sen. Tom Eagleton of Missouri failed to tell McGovern he had suffered depression and undergone shock treatments.  McGovern pledged to stand behind his nominee "1,000 percent" but had to dump him from the ticket days later.

McGovern labored on aboard his campaign jet the "Dakota Queen 2."  He drew 8,000 people to a rally at the Seattle Hilton on Labor Day in 1972.  He returned three more times.  Unlike today's lavish fundraisers and $5,000 photo ops, wife Eleanor McGovern came to a spaghetti feed in the school lunchroom behind Seattle's Blessed Sacrament Church.

The gentle senator could show a steely side.  Rudely heckled at a Michigan rope line, McGovern pulled the heckler close and told the man, "Listen, you son of a bitch.  Why don't you kiss my ass."

He lost by a 61-39 percent margin, saw his charges of Nixon corruption vindicted by Watergate, and  went on to serve eight more years in the Senate.  McGovern continued to lecture, in 1994 making one more (surprisingly respectable) bid for the Democratic nomination, and worked to bolster bipartisan support for such programs as food stamps.

In 1994, the McGoverns' long-troubled daughter , Terry, fell into a snowbank in Madison, Wis., and died of hypothermia.  Her father wrote a book on the family's struggle, "Terry: My Daughter's Life-and-Death Struggle with Alcoholism," that won wide acclaim.

McGovern was still lecturing and doing TV until a fall late last year. Elderly and frail, he flew from South Dakota to New York in 2008 to attend the funeral of a longtime debate rival, the conservative pundit William F. Buckley Jr.

He will be appreciated by progressives, opponents of the Vietnam War, and the now-aging baby boomers who as young people flocked to him in 1972.  A particular memory of that campaign lives on with longtime Seattle political activist Paul Elliott.

Elliott had the job of leaving a bedside snack in McGovern's hotel room.  The senator liked a bowl of corn flakes with milk before hitting the hay, plus a gin martini with an onion. 

The youthful Elliott arranged the fixings.  As a non-drinker, however, he was not  familiar with martini mixings.  After a day on the campaign trail, McGovern retired to find two tiny bottles of gin, a bottle of vermouth . . . and a fist-sized Walla Walla sweet onion.

After a speech in Boise years later, he had a house full of old friends in stitches over the martini memory.
