COLUMBUS, Ohio — With a bill stripping funding from Planned Parenthood expected to move and other abortion-related legislation in the mix, abortion-rights supporters joined female Democratic lawmakers Tuesday to tell Republicans to back off.

"Ohio does not want to turn the clock backward and hand over to politicians the personal medical decisions that belong to a woman, her family, and her faith in consultation with her health care provider," Stephanie Kight, Ohio CEO of Planned Parenthood, said at a Statehouse news conference. "Put aside this vendetta against Planned Parenthood and put women's health care first," she added.

GOP lawmakers are expected to push forward Wednesday by passing a bill out of a House committee that would shift about $2 million in federal funding for Planned Parenthood to other community health centers around the state. Planned Parenthood has a budget of $24 million. The federal funds cannot be used for abortions.

And more abortion-related legislation could be on the horizon, including the so-called heartbeat bill, a ban on all abortions once a heartbeat can be detected in the fetus.

That legislation has been stalled in the Ohio Senate while anti-abortion groups try to unite behind the proposal, but could have fresh momentum if a deal is struck during the Ohio legislature's lame duck session.

While abortion-rights supporters have said the funding shift will hurt women's access to health care across the state, supporters of the legislation dispute this point.

Michael Gonidakis, head of Ohio Right to Life, said the $2 million will flow instead to more than 130 women's health centers including many that are better-equipped to help women handle their health care needs.

For example, Gonidakis said, in Sen. Nina Turner's urban Cleveland district, that federal money would go to as many as 13 community health centers instead of five Planned Parenthood centers. He said the community health centers provide prenatal care and have mammogram machines while the Planned Parenthood centers do not.

"When you peel back the rhetoric, it's a night-and-day difference between the rhetoric and what the reality really is," Gonidakis said.

Turner, who wore a pink T-shirt with "GOP, Get Out of my Panties" on it, said the comparisons that Gonidakis draws in her district completely miss the point.

"Who made them judge and jury over where women chose to go? Whether they live in urban areas or rural areas women should have a right to choose where to go. Period," Turner said. "And Planned Parenthood should be among those choices. They are trying to be slick here and trying to pit the community health centers against Planned Parenthood, but we see right through that."

Longtime pediatrician Grant Morrow, who spoke at the news conference, said the funding shift is political payback from anti-abortion Republicans to Planned Parenthood for providing abortions.

"It's a political agenda, it's not a bill to provide a system of non-judgmental health care to Ohioans," he said.
