Former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman, Jr., an unsuccessful candidate for this year’s GOP presidential nomination, is being mentioned as a possible pick to replace Secretary of State Hillary Clinton when she steps down at the start of Obama’s second term.

SALT LAKE CITY — With Mitt Romney losing his race for the White House, another Republican with Utah ties may be on his way to Washington, D.C. to play a key role in President Barack Obama’s administration.

Former Utah Gov. Jon Huntsman, Jr., an unsuccessful candidate for this year’s GOP presidential nomination, is being mentioned as a possible pick to replace Secretary of State Hillary Clinton when she steps down at the start of Obama’s second term.

The Associated Press reported Thursday that while U.N. Ambassador Susan Rice and Massachusetts Sen. John Kerry are likely high on Obama’s list, unnamed officials “are pointing to Jon Huntsman,” who served as the Democratic president’s U.S. ambassador to China.

The wire service said Huntsman continues to be widely respected in the administration, despite his attempt to unseat Obama. Naming Huntsman to another top post would allow the president to claim bipartisanship while tapping his extensive knowledge of China.

Huntsman told KSL-TV that his future is focused on his family and his work, which includes serving as distinguished fellow at a prominent Washington think tank and as chairman of the Huntsman Cancer Institute as well as giving speeches around the country.

He described what’s ahead for him as “managing a lot of projects that I find absolutely fun, interesting and satisfying.” After returning from China, Huntsman bought a family home in Washington and also a condominium in downtown Salt Lake City.

The speculation Huntsman could be asked a second time to serve in the Obama administration caught many political observers off guard.

“Oh, wow. Wow. Really?” said Quin Monson, head of Brigham Young University’s Center for the Study of Elections and Democracy. “That would be very surprising.”

Monson said it would seem unlikely Huntsman would be brought back into a Democratic administration after running against President Obama.

“On the other hand, he’s signaling he’s had it with the Republican Party. Going back for another round seems to make his transition complete,” Monson said, referring to Huntsman’s complaints about the direction the GOP is headed.

If Huntsman is serious about pursuing the post, Monson said that’s likely a sign he’s no longer eyeing another presidential bid, in 2016, at least not as a Republican. Huntsman has talked about the need for a new, third political party to emerge.
