DESTIN — When Legendary employees received their paychecks Friday, they also found a photocopy of CEO Peter Bos’ sample ballot — with ovals filled in — for Tuesday’s general election.

The ballot was accompanied by a two-page letter from Bos urging his employees to vote with the economy in mind.

“I am constantly asked about my feelings regarding the upcoming elections,” he wrote. “To date, I have refrained from advising anyone. … However, this election is different.”

Bos, whose ballot selected Mitt Romney for president, told employees that the election is about “selecting people that can determine the direction for the USA.”

But some Legendary employees didn’t appreciate the memo — or Bos sharing his personal political leanings.

“Immediately, I thought that was wrong,” said Aleshia Silva, who works at the Emerald Grande. “Your opinion is your opinion, but I don’t think it’s right to attach your ballot to your employees’ paychecks.”

Bos could not be reached for comment Monday.

Silva, who works in the housekeeping department, said voting is a personal matter and that political discussions often are inappropriate in the workplace.

“We have over 600 employees, and they’re not only Republicans,” she said. “Your opinion is your own.”

“You cannot force it on us like this,” added Nicole Alexander, also a Legendary employee.

Okaloosa County Supervisor of Elections Paul Lux said Bos “is free to communicate his opinions in any way he wants to.”

“He can plaster them on walls of his buildings if he so chooses,” Lux said.

But letters like the one Bos sent point out why there is a provision in the law that says an employer is one person not allowed to accompany employees to the voting booth, Lux said.

“It is not necessarily a violation of any kind to tell people how you would like them to vote,” he added. “In the end, they have no way of verifying what you did with your ballot.”

Lux said he would be “leery” of sharing a filled-out sample ballot with employees.

“I can certainly see where there are grounds for them to think this is some sort of veiled intimidation,” he said.

Silva said she has always planned to vote in today’s election.

“I encourage people to vote, but I don’t encourage people who to vote for,” she said. “I’ve never had an employer do this before.”

Contact Daily News Staff Writer Kari Barlow at 850-315-4438 or kbarlow@nwfdailynews.com. Follow her on Twitter @KariBnwfdn.
