Though Hurricane Katrina in 2005 is now seven years passed in our nation’s rear-view mirror; the images of an inundated New Orleans and gut-wrenching stories and photos of people—holding signs, pleading for help—left stranded on rooftops…for days by their government in teeming flood water, are still fresh in many of our minds.

It can be argued that—along with the Iraq War—the Federal Government’s woefully slow and inadequate response to Katrina (Federal Report – PDF) were low points in the presidency of George W. Bush. If fact, a strong case can be made that…if Katrina had happened in 2004, just prior to the presidential election, Bush’s reelection well might have been doomed.

President Obama apparently resolved to learn from the mistakes of his predecessor. Revamping FEMA, the much maligned Federal Emergency Management Agency, which bore the brunt of criticism in the federal government’s Katrina response; Obama’s efforts have seemingly paid off in the precautions and warnings that went out several days in advance of the storm’s landfall.

Fatalities were minimal compared to the sheer extent of the property damage to the entire East Coast. Accordingly, the President has been rewarded with an initial Washington Post/ABC Tracking Poll, showing that 78% of respondents approve of the President’s handling of Hurricane Sandy.

Yesterday, the optics of the President and New Jersey’s Republican Governor (and harsh Obama critic) Chris Christie, touring the devastation and comforting those impacted by the storm, were certainly favorable to the President’s reelection chances…coming just days before the General Election. Even though right-wing radio bombasts such as Rush Limbaugh were openly deriding Governor Christie, he defended his effusive praise of the President, saying,

“The president has been all over this and he deserves great credit. I’ve been on the phone with him, like I said, yesterday, personally three times. He gave me his number at the White House, told me to call him if I needed anything. And he absolutely means it, and it’s been very good working with the President and his administration.”

Yesterday, even another Republican, ex-Mississippi Governor Haley Barbour—who coordinated his state’s response to Katrina—came to Christie’s defense, as reported in a newsmax.com article,

“People understand that Chris Christie’s job is to try to protect the lives, the families and the property of the people of New Jersey, and to try to turn around what’s happened and get started in a recovery mode as fast as they can,” Barbour said, when asked if Christie’s praise of Obama would hurt the Romney campaign. And so I think Chris Christie’s doing exactly what he ought to be doing,” Barbour added. “He’s doing what the people of New Jersey elected him to do.”

Notably—in the new tracking poll—Mitt Romney’s approval relative to Hurricane Sandy response has been tepid at best, with only 44% of respondents expressing “net positive” approval, while 21% expressed “net negative” and 35% “no opinion.” This poll only reflects the public’s initial reaction to Obama’s and the Federal Government’s response to the massive storm. We are now entering a more—uncertain—prolonged period of strained nerves and rising tempers, as people must wait for restoration of electrical power, supplies and normal services.

But, given the response from Team Romney, which barely halted campaigning and even resorted to craven–staged, opportunistic photo ops–while the President was doing his job as commander-in-chief–President Obama has deservedly benefitted from his performance—thus far—during this national crisis.

Added to another poll taken by Gallup, before the hurricane, showing a positive favorability trend for the President, things are indeed looking good for his reelection. Now, as one pundit was heard to remark, “It appears that Mother Nature may be voting Democratic this year.”

Here is direct access to an archive of all of my articles written for Addicting Info
