Numerous journalists — self-identified reporters, editors and photographers affiliated with established news organizations — contributed money in September and October to the campaigns of President Barack Obama or Mitt Romney.

Some equate their contributions to free speech or cite the right to act on personal political views during an increasingly tight election’s most critical stage. Others say they’re driven by history, or offer no explanation at all.

Longtime Wall Street Journal arts reporter Paul Levy is unapologetic for his contributions to Obama’s campaign.

“It’s very simple: I think Romney is a dangerous religious freak whose election will cripple America,” said Levy, who has donated $225 to Obama this year. Levy says his political donations don’t pose a conflict of interest because he doesn’t write about politics.

The Wall Street Journal’s political and civic activities policy states that “all news personnel … should refrain from partisan political activity,” including “making a financial contribution to a candidate’s campaign.” Journal spokeswoman Ashley Huston described Levy as a “freelance contributor,” not a salaried staff member, and declined to discuss his political contribution.

Gersh Kuntzman, the New York Daily News’ deputy managing editor for news, gave the Obama Victory Fund joint fundraising committee $250 on Sept. 27. Kuntzman declined to comment for this story.

MattWalsh, editor and chief executive of The Observer Media Group, which owns Florida newspapers such as Sarasota Observer, Longboat Observer and East County Observer, contributed to the Romney Victory Fund. Walsh said it was not a conflict of interest because he was expressing his right to free speech.

“I don’t cover any of the races,” Walsh said. “Everybody who reads our papers knows that our philosophical point of view is libertarian in our editorials. We don’t hide anything. It would be different if a reporter covering the race was making a contribution.”

ESPN sportscaster Stuart Scott also doesn’t cover politics directly; he gave $25,000 to Obama’s joint fundraising committee in September.

ESPN spokesman Bill Hofheimer wouldn’t comment on Scott specifically, referring POLITICO instead to the network’s policy on political activity. The policy offers on-air staffers wide berth, only discouraging, but not prohibiting “those involved in the newsgathering process” from engaging in “matters of political advocacy or controversy.” It also states that staff who “nonetheless involve themselves in political advocacy may be reassigned to avoid their handling of news, coverage or other topics” that “could be impacted by such advocacy.”

Within the news industry, the act of journalists engaging in checkbook politics remains a deeply contentious ethical issue — a potentially fireable offense at some organizations, but accepted elsewhere.
