Ms. Flournoy’s central argument is that Mr. Romney’s plan to peg military spending to 4 percent of the G.D.P. is not based, she said, on a strategy, a threat assessment or what the Pentagon says it needs. “It’s simply ‘Let’s throw a figure against the wall and look tough on defense,’ ” she said in an interview.

Since Mr. Romney is reluctant to put tax increases on the table to pay for the spending increase, she said, there would have to be “draconian” cuts to the rest of the federal budget, including entitlement programs.

For the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, the Pentagon’s base budget is $525 billion. Under Mr. Obama, it is to grow only with inflation over the next decade, keeping military spending essentially flat. By 2022, Mr. Obama’s projected annual base Pentagon budget would be $629 billion. Mr. Romney’s military budget, using Mr. Harrison’s calculations, would be $986 billion.

The figures do not include the supplemental cost of the war in Afghanistan, which is budgeted separately, at $88 billion for this fiscal year. That cost is projected to decrease and eventually disappear after the withdrawal of the bulk of American forces by the end of 2014. Mr. Romney would like to put the savings back into the Pentagon’s base budget; Mr. Obama would not.

The current Pentagon budget, including money for the war in Afghanistan, amounts to 4.2 percent of the G.D.P. Without the war costs, military spending is 3.4 percent of the G.D.P. By 2022, Mr. Harrison estimated, Mr. Obama’s base Pentagon budget would be 2.6 percent of the G.D.P.

In Groton, the numbers that matter are people. About 10,000 sailors, other military personnel and civilians work on the Navy’s submarine base each day. Electric Boat, which shares the building of the two submarines a year with the Newport News Shipbuilding division of Huntington Ingalls, employs more than 8,000 people at its facilities in Groton and across the Thames River in New London.

As a result of the two submarines a year, Electric Boat hired more than 300 engineers this year and has plans to hire more than 300 welders, carpenters and other workers by the end of December.

Advocates say that nuclear-powered submarines, which can get close to shorelines without detection and have highly sophisticated technology to intercept communications, remain crucial to gathering intelligence and waging war.

“The drones are getting a lot of credit right now because they’re blowing up guys who live in mud huts,” said John B. Padgett, a retired rear admiral who is the president of the Naval Submarine League. “But a submarine will drive in 10 miles off the beach, take a picture of a missile and blow up the missile before it launches.”

Still, there are reservations in Groton about ever more submarines.

“Look, of course we’d love three subs a year,” said Tony Sheridan, the president of the Chamber of Commerce of Eastern Connecticut, who identified himself as a Democrat. “But we’re also responsible Americans, and we know that we have to deal with the deficit.”
