We want a country where not just the rich get richer. The class mobility in the US, historically our strong point, now far lags other countries. We want our children to have better opportunity.

We want a country where religion isn't shoved down our throats, up our vaginas, or takes the place of science and evidence based reasoning. In particular we'd like congress' science committees staffed by people of the 20th century or at least post-enlightenment.

We want a country that puts evidence before theory and both before ideology

We want a country where we can afford to go to college. This was another US historic strong point (starting with the WW2 GI Bill)

We want a country where being sick doesn't mean death or bankruptcy.

We want a country that doesn't incarcerate a higher fraction if it's population than any other or tries to make a business out of it.

We want truly equality under the law: women, minorities, poor, whatever.

We want good jobs that allow us to retire and work without fear.

We want a country where every politician isn't beholden to the corporate interests they now need (though the GOP couldn't even make that work)

We want a country that uses war as an honest absolute last resort.

We want a country that doesn't spend more than the next top 15 countries or so on defense while its infrastructure and education needs help.

We want a country where the rich don't pay a lower effective tax rate than the middle class.

We want clean water, clean air, safe food and drugs.

We want Wall St/banks to be regulated so that we don't ever hear the words "too big to fail" and get whacked by more bubbles.

We want to do away with the idea that money is speech and corporations are people.

We want a country that understands that we are more than the sum of our parts. I know that people on the right will view this as socialism. I disagree, what the right is advocating is pretty much anarchy; a corporate dystopia. We want schools, infrastructure, etc and that takes money. We are part of physical communities. That's why we have taxes. To have nice things. To use the nice things, like the roads, and to not pay taxes doesn't make you a patriot; it makes you a deadbeat.

We want elections that operate in the manner befitting a first world country that aren't subject to partisans.

We want a politicians that put country over party at least to the point that they don't threaten, like a kid, to hold their breath until their face turns blue unless they get what they want

...and a tad of civility and compromise wouldn't hurt
