Florida is heavily scrutinized every election; partially due to the high electoral vote count and its swing state nature, but also because of controversial vote counts from 2000 and on (younger Bush’s first election). This year is shaping up to be no different, as serious questions are being asked about early vote counts already.

Broward County, a Democratic Party stronghold located in south eastern Florida, has already has some serious early vote counting issues. The total vote count was revised by 536 total, from 28,330 down to 27,794. That might not seem like much, but remember that in the 2000 election, the entire state was decided by only 538 votes.

However, the disturbing part is that in some areas the count was off by a pretty significant amount — one from 2,945 to 1,942! The Grio, an NBC News affiliate, offers this breakdown:

They go on to report,

“There could be a very simple explanation. I have no idea,” said David Brown, a political consultant who is working for three Broward candidates, and who downloaded the Sunday early vote totals Sunday morning, only to be asked later by a colleague for the numbers, which he retrieved from his phone. When he looked at the revised totals, the Pat Larkins number stood out. “Almost every one of the precincts changed,” Brown said. “Some by two or three, one by about 100. But the Pat Larkins Center, that’s more than a thousand votes. I’m curious why.” Brown said that when he inquired about the numbers, he was told by the elections office that the changes had resulted from a “computer glitch.”

Computer glitch? If so, they should release the exact details of such a glitch along with testimony from several computer experts, because votes aren’t something that you play around with. If there is a glitch, it needs to be fixed, and immediately. They also said that there were a couple transposing errors that were fixed, but there is no excuse for any of this.

 I would be delighted if you joined me on Facebook for instant access to my articles.
