Sean Hannity was predictably agog over Donald Trump’s latest birther stunt – offering $5 million to the charity of President Obama’s choice if he releases his college transcripts, application and passport application. And just like he did in the Trump’s last birther lap, Hannity pretended Trump was raising legitimate, un-birther questions that President Obama should answer in the name of transparency. Then Hannity and Guilfoyle used Obama's expected failure to respond as yet another reason to attack him. For this alone, Hannity and Guilfoyle should be fired and thrown off the air for good. But we know they won't be.

With a malicious smile, Hannity said, “I suggest, Mr. President, take $5 million and you could redistribute the wealth with Donald Trump’s money.”

Kimberly Guilfoyle giggled along. But that’s not so surprising considering that the last time we saw liberal-before-Fox Guilfoyle, she was slobbering over Trayvon Martin-shooter George Zimmerman and Hannity’s dubious interview with him.

The only thing more sickening than this disgusting display of birtherism was Hannity's I'm-just-curious pretense. Just like Trump's I'm-just-curious pretense. Hannity said, oh, so innocently, "All he’s (Trump's) saying – his college transcripts, applications, passport records and applications - $5 million for charity for kids. I’m like, why would anyone be against that? Why would the president just dismiss that?”

Guilfoyle, grinning from ear to ear, offered up her own I'm-just-curious baloney. She said,  “Only if you’re a mean-spirited person that doesn’t want to be charitable. In fact, it looks like he DOES NOT.” Sneaking a peek at the camera, she sneered, “Everyone knows. God, he loves other people’s money and spending it, doesn’t he?“

Surprisingly, it was Glenn Beck lite, Eric Bolling, who pooh-poohed Trump’s stunt. Bolling said, “Donald would be better served talking about some of the things that are really going on in the economy.” Bolling went on an extended discourse about how Obama is ruining the economy to the eager-eared Hannity.

But Hannity was not to be dissuaded from talking up the birther. “I think we can walk and chew gum,” he said by way of reintroducing the subject. With more feigned guilelessness, Hannity added, “There’s a challenge here that this president said he’d be transparent (Guilfoyle murmured her agreement off camera). And yet he’s so reluctant to let us see a little, a little glimpse into his past. And I think there’s a reason. Why would you reject $5 million for charity when all he has to do is say to somebody that works for him, ‘Get my college records. Get my passport records. Here, Mr. Trump, give me the $5 million. Here are my charities.”

Guilfoyle added, “If he wanted us to see them, he would have let them out before. Instead, they’ve spent a tremendous amount of money to hide and to conceal.”

Well, speaking of avoiding a challenge for charity, today is Day 1283, or 3 years, 6 months, 4 days since Hannity offeredto be waterboarded for charity. Keith Olbermann upped the ante by offering $1,000 to charity for every second Hannity tolerates the process. Hannity’s offer and Olbermann’s challenge are the second video below.

Considering that Hannity called waterboarding “dunking,” that should add up to quite a hefty sum for Hannity’s charity of choice, eh? What’s he hiding?

You can contact Hannity via Twitter at @SeanHannity and Guilfoyle @KimGuilfoyle.
