In press conferences on the so-called fiscal cliff, House Speaker John Boehner greatly exaggerated the negative effect on the economy of raising taxes on upper-income individuals.

The “fiscal cliff” is shorthand for a $560 billion mix of tax hikes and deep spending cuts that are scheduled to kick in at the end of 2012. The Congressional Budget Office warned that absent intervention by federal legislators, the confluence of tax hikes and spending cuts “will lead to economic conditions in 2013 that will probably be considered a recession.” President Barack Obama and congressional Democrats have advocated that the George W. Bush tax cuts be allowed to expire for those making over $250,000. In a press conference on Nov. 9, Boehner said he believes a tax hike on the wealthy would harm an already fragile economy.

Boehner has got a point — some small-business owners will see taxes go up, and the CBO projects some restraint on economic growth as a result. But he and other Republicans exaggerate this greatly, even to the point of making statements that are downright false sometimes.

In his news conference on Nov. 9, Boehner repeated an incorrect talking point about the percentage of wealthy Americans who are small-business owners.

It’s not true that more than half of the people who earn more than $250,000 are small-business owners. Boehner’s spokesman, Michael Steel, said Boehner misspoke, that he meant to say half of small-business income, not half of small-business owners. If it’s an honest mistake, it’s one Boehner has made before.

Steel pointed to a July 14, 2010, report from the Joint Committee on Taxation that found 53 percent of the $1.3 trillion of business income would be reported on tax returns in the top two tax brackets that Obama proposes to raise taxes on. However, the JCT study makes clear that not all of this income might be considered “small”; that in 2005, “12,862 S corporations and 6,658 partnerships had receipts on more than $50 million.”

In 2011, the Treasury Department’s Office of Tax Analysis took a more in-depth look at the issue using a more realistic definition of “small business” and it shows that more than 90 percent of small-business owners wouldn’t be affected by Obama’s proposal to raise taxes on individuals making over $200,000 and couples making over $250,000. Moreover, about 90 percent of those who would be affected by the tax increase are not small-business owners.

Using the Treasury report’s “narrow” definition of small business — one with $10 million maximum in income (or deductions) — and defining “owner” as anyone who gets at least one-fourth of all his or her income from a “small business,” then:

In making his case for the Bush tax cuts to be extended for everyone, Boehner has repeatedly cited a study done by the accounting firm Ernst & Young.

Boehner is referring to a study prepared by two economists at Ernst & Young on behalf of pro-business groups: the Independent Community Bankers of America, the National Federation of Independent Business, the S Corporation Association, and the United States Chamber of Commerce — all of which lean strongly Republican. One of the study’s authors, Robert Carroll, once worked in the Treasury Department under President George W. Bush.

Boehner accurately cited the figures in the report, but left out some important caveats.

There’s an important caveat in there that some may miss; the projection assumes the revenue generated by raising taxes on those making over $250,000 would be “used to finance additional government spending.” The report did not examine what would happen if the additional revenue were used to reduce future federal deficits. As we noted when the report was raised during the vice presidential debate, Moody’s chief economist, Mark Zandi, called that omission “odd” and said, “It seems to me that is the more relevant scenario. And my sense is that if they did, the results would be very different.”

In its analysis of fiscal cliff alternatives, the nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office assumed that “a significant part of the decrease in taxes (relative to those under current law) would be saved rather than spent.”

We asked Boehner spokesman Michael Steel about that Ernst & Young report’s assumption, and he responded by email: “How would additional revenue reduce government spending? Given that President Obama’s budget includes a trillion-dollar deficit, isn’t it obvious that new revenue would go to spending?”

But the Ernst & Young report assumed the revenue would be used for “additionalgovernment spending.” According to the 2013 budget proposedby Obama, spending would go down. As part of the Budget Control Act agreed to by both parties, discretionary spending will be reduced by $1 trillion over 10 years. The projected deficit for the 2012 fiscal year, $1.33 trillion, is expected to drop to $901 billion in FY 2013.

There’s another small-print caveat to the Ernst & Young report, the definition of “long run.” A footnote at the bottom of the report explains that “roughly two-third to three-quarters of the long-run effect is reached within a decade.” In other words, when the report cites the loss of 700,000 jobs, a quarter to a third of those job losses would happen more than a decade from now.

In addition to costing Americans jobs, Boehner contended in his Nov. 9 press conference that “we also know that it would slow down our economy.” If it does, it won’t be by much, according to the Congressional Budget Office.

In a November report looking at the impact of the fiscal cliff and several alternative scenarios, the CBO concluded that raising taxes just on those earning above $250,000 would have a “relatively small effect” on the economy. (Page 2)

According to the report, if instead of allowing the Bush tax cuts to expire, they were extended for everyone, it would result in a 1.4 percent inflation-adjusted increase in the GDP (and 1.8 million jobs). Conversely, if the Bush tax cuts were extended only for those who earn less than $250,000, then the GDP would rise 1.3 percent (and add 1.6 million jobs). In other words, as the House Ways and Means Committee Democrats noted in a Nov. 8 press release,  0.1 percent of GDP and 200,000 jobs are attributable to the upper-income Bush tax cuts.
