see more posts by Jason Easley and Sarah Jones

Bill Maher reminded America that if Mitt Romney is elected, it will be a return to the anti-intellectual and anti-science days of George W. Bush.

Here is the video:

America, before you get in bed with Mitt Romney, remember he may seem like a nice fella from what we know about his core beliefs. Nothing. His tax plan. Nothing. His faith. Off limits, and his donors, anonymous. Now when I talk about getting into bed with Mitt Romney, I don’t mean that literally. Please, Mitt Romney doesn’t even know what a blow job is. He thinks it’s something the Pep Boys do to clean out your carburetor. No, what I’m trying to do is make an analogy to that old public service announcement about how when you go to bed with one person, you’re not just sleeping with them. Well, it’s like that with Mitt. When you elect Mitt, you’re not just electing him. You’re electing every right wing nut he’s pandered to in the last ten years. If the Mittmobile does roll into Washington it will be towing behind it the whole anti-intellectual anti-science freak show. The abstinence obsessives, the flat earthers, home schoolers, the holy warriors, the anti-women social neanderthals, the closeted homosexuals, and every endtimer who sees the Virgin Mary in the grass over the septic tank. Now, I understand having issues with Obama, but stop to think of all the crap we haven’t had to deal with in the last four years. Anybody remember Terri Schiavo? Obama isn’t perfect, but he never turned the entire federal government into a Jesus freak episode of House. And he doesn’t have an attorney general like John Ashcroft, who once covered up a statue at the Justice Department because it was showing too much tit, like it was Janet Jackson. I’m just saying, last four years, no crisis about boobies. No controversies about whether stem cells are actually tiny people. No Defense of Marriage Act, no Office of Faith Based Initiatives, no pedalling creationism at the national parks. Did you know that before Obama got in the Smithsonian couldn’t mention global warming as a possible reason the glaciers were shrinking? Because heat melting ice was just a theory. Yes, that was our daily diet of turd under the last business minded sensible moderate. And before you say, that was then, this is now, sitting in Congress right now we’ve got a fresh can of nuts just waiting to get cracked open.

Maher discussed Rep. Paul Broun who told his supporters that evolution, embryology, and the Big Bang Theory are lies from the pit of hell. He also mentioned the chair of the Science Committee, Ralph Hall, who claimed that we don’t need to mention global warming because God controls it. Maher also mentioned that Broun and Todd Akin are on the Science Committee, and said, “This is what you get with today’s Republican Party, and a new Republican administration would be an open for business sign to all the bizarre Bible thumping bulls**t that the Obama administration has given us a break from. And to those who say oh, don’t worry, Mitt Romney will stand up to the extreme elements of his party. There’s just one problem with that. It has the name Mitt Romney, and the words stand up in the same sentence.”

This may come as a shock to some people, but Mitt Romney doesn’t have the backbone of George W. Bush. Grover Norquist wanted a rubber stamp president and that is exactly who Mitt Romney would be. The reason why Romney hasn’t pulled his endorsement of Richard Mourdock is that he is absolutely terrified of the far right wing of the Republican Party. Romney is still trying to convince far right that he is one of them. If elected, Romney would cave and give the right everything that they want.

Bill Maher was right. All of the extremist right wing cultural baggage that most Americans disagreed with during the Bush years will return bigger than ever if Romney is elected. These people aren’t working so hard to elect Romney because they believe in him and support him. They are fighting tooth and nail for Romney because they desperately want to be back in power. One of the reasons why they hate Obama so much is because he has stopped their agenda dead in its tracks.

Romney wants to take the country away from the fact and science based presidency of Barack Obama, and plunge the country back into banning embryonic stem cell research while denying climate change. The meme of the campaign has been that the Romney social policy would take America back to the 1950s, and his economic policy would take the country back to the 1920s.

In reality, Romney’s goal is to restore the policies of George W. Bush.

The saying, “Those who cannot remember the past are condemned to repeat it,” is one that every voter should keep in mind as they weigh whether the future direction of the country will be guided by Mitt Romney or Barack Obama.
