

President Obama on Wednesday criticized Senate candidate Richard Mourdock's controversial comments on rape, saying that the Indiana Republican was wrong when he called pregnancy resulting from rape "something God intended to happen."

"I don't know how these guys come up with these ideas," Obama said during a taping of "The Tonight Show" in Burbank, Calif. "Let me make a very simple proposition. Rape is rape. It is a crime."

"These various distinctions about rape don't make too much sense to me, don't make any sense to me," he said.

(Also on POLITICO: Exclusive interview: Mourdock braces for fallout)

Obama also laid out a contrast between his position on women's issues and Mitt Romney's, saying that "Roe vs. Wade is probably hanging in the balance" depending on the outcome of the presidential race and the winner's eventual Supreme Court appointments.

Obama added that Mourdock's remarks are evidence of why government shouldn't make decisions on women's health.

"This is exactly why you don't want a bunch of politicians, mostly male, making decisions about women's health care decisions. Women are capable of making these decisions in consultation with their partners, with their doctors," he said to loud applause. "And for politicians to want to intrude in this stuff, oftentimes without any information, is a huge problem. And this is obviously part of what's stake at this election."

Mourdock's comment, made Tuesday, has mobilized the Obama campaign and Democrats to call on Mitt Romney to distance himself from the Senate candidate.

(Also on POLITICO: GOP splits over Mourdock comment)

The Romney campaign distanced itself from Mourdock's statement on rape, but still supports the candidate and has not asked him to stop using an ad featuring Romney. "Gov. Romney disagrees with Richard Mourdock, and Mr. Mourdock's comments do not reflect Gov. Romney's views. We disagree on the policy regarding exceptions for rape and incest but still support him," press secretary Andrea Saul said.

But other prominent Republicans are still weighing their options on Mourdock. Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) said his support for the Indiana Republican “depends on what he does.”

“If he apologizes and says he misspoke and he was wrong and asks the people to forgive him, I would be the first" to support him, McCain said on CNN's “Anderson Cooper 360.”

Earlier Wednesday, the Obama campaign released a web video juxtaposing clips from Romney's pro-Mourdock ad with Mourdock's remarks on rape. The video ends with message, "Mitt Romney: extremely conservative to this day."
