It just hit me today. Romney, although pandering, honestly believes a few things in his core. That earnestness comes out in weird ways, like that story about him trying to give a half finished hot chocolate back to the Starbucks employee who served it to him. He was honestly baffled that someone wouldn't just take it back and drink it.

I think he honestly believes he's a self-made man. His privileges don't seem to equate in his thinking. When he sees his wealth and achievements, he seems to forget the enormous advantages he got in education and resources. I mean, it's a rare thing for anyone to be able to sell stock to help pay for college.

This kind of intellectual blind spot is dangerous in a President. It means that he isn't Machiavellian, or Rovian. There is no mustache twirling desire to defraud the American people and make the rich richer. He truly doesn't understand what it's like to juggle bills, wonder how to make rent, or think you'll never get a job again.

And that blind spot means that, unlike say Franklin Roosevelt (Another child of privilege), Romney just can't see or understand what it's like for most people. It doesn't compute that parents can't just loan their kids money. He's never met someone who had to give their dad rent money, or worked a part-time job to help pay groceries.

On some level, I think this is the real reason that Bill Clinton and Barrack Obama are so reviled by Republicans. Both of them started from much humbler beginnings. Obama, luckily for him, had middle-class grandparents. Clinton, though, had a much tougher start. Yet they both, through force of intellect and will rose into the wealthy and elite class of American life, without those blinders of privilege. On the contrary, those blinders don't exist for either of them, and Republicans seem to hate nothing more than successful people who refuse to wear those blinders.

Clinton has blind spots, especially when it comes to personal responsibility. Obama does, too, strangely choosing (and being great at) politics, without having a good handle on the small moments that can create perceptions of aloofness.

Those qualities aren't dangerous in leaders, however. But the earnest blind spot that Mitt Romney has for privilege is dangerous. Romney truly believes 47% of the nation are undeserving moochers, because he can't picture a world where he was helped to become wealthy.

UPDATE - sorry, it wasn't Starbucks, it was Seattle's Best Coffee - http://slog.thestranger.com/slog/archives/2012/07/27/romney-offers-barista-half-consumed-hot-cocoa-in-lieu-of-tip
