This sad, ugly attack from the GOP trying to pin the murders of 4 Americans on President Obama is starting to backfire hard.

I'm sure everyone saw the debate where Obama schooled Romney so hard on the Libya attacks and his exploitation of them to the point that it almost looked like Romney was going to cry... almost.

Well its not looking any better for the GOP. This was the wrong fight to pick and now it is blowing up in their face....

You read that right. As Romney and Ryan take turns slamming Obama over 4 Americans killed at our embassy in Libya, Paul Ryan voted to cut over $400 Million from foreign embassy safety funding. You know, funding used to prevent attacks from happening.

The same goes for Darrell Issa, the GOP's head witch hunter.

They have the nerve to bitch that there should have been more protection at the embassy after they cut $400 Million from funding that would have provided more protection.

Maybe they'll now understand why running through a budget with a machete and cutting everything in sight probably isn't a good idea.

I think the GOP should apologize to the family members affected by this attack, A) for politicizing their deaths and using it to falsely smear Obama B) for cutting funding that would have been used to prevent this attack and possibly saved their lives.

I also think they should apologize to President Obama and his Administration.

Trying to pin these murders on Obama and use it against him is a pretty cold move.

When 3,000 Americans were killed on US soil, we didn't use it to try to bring down a President we didn't like (and didn't even win). We came together and out our differences aside. I have no confidence or proof that Republicans would do the same if the tables were turned.

The Iraq war is what polarized Bush and turned half the country against him. Amongst other things...

Obama deserves an apology from Mitt Romney and the GOP for using a tragedy to try and smear him when the House GOP voted to cut funding that may have prevented that tragedy.

But once again... I won't hold my breath.
