Several people have called to complain about ads the Pennsylvania Department of State is running stating that voters need their ID in order to vote. The Voter ID law was delayed by the courts, which should have led to all the ads being pulled. But the department hasn’t pulled them. This is very confusing to people. Well, let me clear it up. No, you don’t have to have your ID at the polling place this election, but it will be needed for all other elections after this one. This election should be the same as all other elections in the past. Why the GOP controlled department is still running these ads is because they are still trying to confuse people and keep people who planned to vote for President Obama, away from the polls. Also anyone voting at a closed school should call to find out where they are voting. I called, and was told that most of the closed schools that closed this year will be open for the election. But for those who haven’t voted since 2008 this may not be the case. Call the Voter Registration office at 412-350-4500. Speaking of polls, according to most independent polls, and the Sunday Morning shows, Obama and Romney are tied at 47 percent each. And as far as the two major turn states, Obama is two percentage points ahead of Romney in Ohio, with Romney being 2 percentage points ahead of Obama in Florida. Talking about close, yes every vote will count. This has some saying that it may once again be a situation where the candidate receiving the most popular votes loses because they don’t have the majority of the Electoral College votes? But what if the Electoral College votes are even? The House of Representatives then decides. This leads me to the question of when are we going to get rid of this antiquated system of the Electoral College. How can we keep saying we are the leaders of the free world, and we are a true democracy when we aren’t. It should be one man, one vote. That’s democracy. Not some group of people who we did not vote for making choices of who the next president is going to be. That should be left up to the people. But for some reason we keep hanging on to this old out dated system that the founding fathers put in place because they didn’t trust the people to be able to make the right decisions. That doesn’t sound like democracy to me. The people have proven after more than 400 years that they are more than able to pick their own leaders. Back to the closeness of the race. This is all the more reason that Black middle-income, low-income and poor must come out to vote, because this election will have a lot to do with Black prosperity. Will there be programs helping low-income people, will there be a push for diversity in the higher paying jobs, will the doors be kept open for all in the universities throughout this country or will Affirmative Action be killed, will health care be available and affordable to all, even if your employer does not provide it? There’s no difference in Romney and Bush. That’s why when asked he could not give a clear definition of the difference. Like always, he leaves you asking, what did he say? All voters need to realize that George Bush and the Republican Party put us in this mess, and they have blocked Obama every step of the way. As far as the ambassador who was killed in Libya, the Obama administration should admit they didn’t have enough security, because they didn’t have enough information. Say “we made a mistake and we are sorry,” and move on. Most of the independent sources are saying no matter how much security they would have had, the ambassador still would have been killed, because the attack was with far more force than anyone expected, including the GOP. Some sources are saying that one of the reasons the security force was not as large was that the Obama administration saw Libya as a friendly country since they killed former head Moammar Gadhafi. This shows a lack of common sense. This man was the leader of this country for decades, he had friends, and they struck a critical blow to the Obama administration who had him killed. (Ulish Carter is managing editor of the New Pittsburgh Courier.)
