Last year, I posted an idea to Reddit that received a considerable amount of attention: Reddit can enable "occupy" movements to permanently shift power from corporations to people and move the world into a new era. Here's how. The community response was overwhelmingly positive; clearly, I am not the only one who wants to see change in the world's power structure.

Since then, I've assembled a team of volunteers via the original Reddit post and through my own personal network. I left my position as an executive at a Fortune 500 four months ago to focus my attention on this project, and things are speeding up toward a late Q1/early Q2 launch of "The Spark."

Twitter, Facebook, and Reddit have already been used by people to organize and impact the global state of affairs. The Arab Spring, SOPA/PIPA, Foxconn workers' conditions... the list goes on. The goal of this project is to expedite this power-rebalancing by providing a tool explicitly designed for this purpose. Our platform will enable people to not only decide which issues deserve widespread attention, but to then agree on the best solutions and take collective action to affect real-world change. To make this all possible, we created a non-partisan, not-for-profit organization (501(c)(3) registration pending) to manage implementation.

Firstly to Reddit: my sincerest thanks and admiration for your enthusiasm and dedication to what we're creating. Our team now consists of:

Reddit, we plan to launch in a massively disruptive way in early 2013 and we need your help:

Please check out the job descriptions and email Jobs@TheSpark.org with your CV if you have the skills (and the will) to dedicate to this project.

2.) Help us spread the word

To find partners and reach critical mass, we need the world to learn about our concept and our Crowdtilt campaign. Please help us spread the word!

Reddit, let's unite the masses and change the world: Follow us: @TheSparkDotOrg (#thespark) Register your email address for updates: TheSpark.org
