For those who might think Rick Santorum is a bit old-fashioned, they need look no further than his new book, “American Patriots.”

The book goes back — way back — to recall the glory days of the Revolutionary War.

“There are so many Revolutionary heroes and heroines from all walks of life,” writes Santorum, who seems to know that not everyone is as up to speed on the topic as he is.

“Most Americans know something about our Founding Fathers and their role in creating the government of the United States. However, most know little about the day-to-day battles fought by Americans of all backgrounds that paved the way for the high ideals of our founders to be put into practice.”

Ditto Bill Bennett, who pens the book’s foreword. “It is the story of Patriots, both known and unknown — people like John Laurens, Nancy Morgan Hart, Lydia Darragh, and Haym Salomon. Do these names mean anything to you? They should.”

Santorum thinks the modern day world could learn a thing or two from what happened centuries ago.

“Today we are facing a threat to the very foundation our founders laid,” writes Santorum. “That threat does not come from an alien force but from those who are willing and determined to abandon the concept of God-given rights. Like the royalty during the Revolution, today’s elites wish to return to the pre-Revolutionary paradigm in which they, through governmental force, allocate rights and responsibilities.”

And about that “pursuit of happiness” thing? Santorum gives it an edit.

“Did God give us the right to pursue a good time? Don’t get me wrong—happiness is a wonderful emotion and a state to be desired. But is that what our founders really intended to be the pursuit of our country and its people—to be happy? Let’s put it this way: How would you like your tombstone to read, ‘Here lies [your name]. He/she was happy’? Count me out! Isn’t life supposed to be more significant than that? Let’s face it—many of life’s pleasures are not even good for us, as my waistline constantly reminds me.”

The book also has plenty of praise for Santorum, including from Bill Bennett.

“Without an active, informed citizenry, we risk becoming alien to the nation we inhabit. Perhaps no cultural or political leader grasps this better than Rick Santorum. It is entirely fitting that the son of hardworking Catholic Italian immigrants be the one to tell the story of America’s great, but often overlook, Patriots. From his time in the US Senate to his candidacy for presidential nominee, Santorum has defended the defenseless and spoken on behalf of those with voices often drowned out by popular culture or secular media.”

Conservative radio show hosts Glenn Beck, Laura Ingraham and Mark Levin all provide the book glowing blurbs as well.
