see more posts by Sarah Jones

Jon Stewart summed up the GOP’s positions on rape, abortion, and conception, ‘If a woman wants to have a baby via IVF she can not. Rape? She has to.’

Here is the video:

After playing Mourdock’s God intended rape comments, Mourdock’s follow up press conference where he declared that his God abhors rape, and Joe Scarborough claiming that Mourdock is turning off swing state voters, Stewart said,

No, that’s not the problem. That’s not the problem. The problem is the believing of the things, not that he. The problem isn’t that he violated the first law of Fetus Club, which is don’t talk about Fetus Club. Like that’s not, because it’s the ideas. I mean where does Mourdock get his crazy fringe ideas about rape and abortion anyway? Ah, I don’t know. Maybe from Mitt Romney’s running mate, Paul Ryan, who cosponsored a Sanctity of Human Life Act so severe that it not only could outlaw all abortions, but it could also effectively ban in vitro fertilization. Or from the platform of the Republican Party, which states that the unborn child has a fundamental individual right to life, and calls for a human life amendment to the constitution. Nothing in there about exceptions for rape, incest, life of the mother, or feelings of swing voters. In other words, according to the Republican Party platform, and the man who wants to be a heartbeat away from the presidency, if a woman wants to have a baby, in vitro fertilization, she can not. Rape? She she has to. No wonder they buried it on page fourteen instead of splashing it across the cover.

The Daily Show host summed the issue up in an understandable way that every American should hear. The Republican Party has gone so far to the extreme that their position is to force women to have their rapists’ babies, while they forbid women from conceiving in a modern, non-Bible approved way. The Republican rejection of IVF is also related to the fact that the GOP is under the control of the conservative anti-science fringe.

Stewart was right on. The Republican Party doesn’t get it. The problem with the Akins and Mourdocks of their party isn’t that they turn off swing voters and lose elections. The problem is that they believe in things like “legitimate rape,” and rape being, “God’s intention.” These men are advocating a policy that glorifies the fruits of a heinous and violent crime against women.

Republicans also seem to be under the delusion that this issue is a trivial distraction in this campaign. On The Ed Show, Republican strategist Ron Christie called issues of contraception and choice, “small ball.” There is nothing small ball about telling women what they can do with their bodies. There is nothing trivial about the idea that men like Tom Smith, Richard Mourdock, and Todd Akin will be coming in between a woman and her doctor. Would any American, male or female, want Akin and Mourdock acting in their capacity as federally elected officials making healthcare decisions for them?

If the Republicans are successful in using the government to dictate what women can do with their bodies, who is to say that someday they won’t decide that cancer is God’s will, and it would help reduce the deficit if we let those people die as, “God intended.”

Where would it stop?

The Republican positions on rape and abortion are more than women’s issues.

The issue is freedom, and destruction of personal liberties knows no gender.
