Voter Fraud is exceedingly rare. A study by a consortium of journalism schools  found only 867 proven cases in the United States since 2000. Democrats  have been guilty in the past, but in 2012, all the fraud has apparently been on the Republican side of the aisle.

Patrick Moran, son of Democratic Rep Jim Moran, resigned after he got caught in a James O-Keefe sting operation. An undercover cameraman asked him how he could bring in a busload of fraudulent voters. In the  video, Moran tries to talk the guy out of it. He suggests he'd do better working on traditional get out the vote efforts. But then, because he's an idiot, Moran relents and offers him some tips. Moran says he didn't think the guy was serious. He's since resigned. In any event, the entrapment worked politically but no actual fraud occurred.

For Republicans, it's a different story.  The Las Vegas Sun:

Investigators today arrested a Southern Nevada woman suspected of trying to vote twice this week at two different polling locations. Roxanne Rubin was taken into custody as she arrived for work at the Riviera hotel-casino, investigators said. Rubin, 56, is a registered Republican who lives in Henderson, according to the Clark County Registrar. Rubin allegedly cast a vote Monday at the Anthem Community Center in Henderson. Later that day, she tried to vote a second time at an early voting location on Eastern Avenue, investigators said.

A Clackamas County elections worker is undercriminal investigation for tampering with ballots, WW has learned.  The underlying allegation is that the woman, whose name has not been released, filled in blanks on ballots turned into the county for the Nov. 6 general election.  Sources familiar with the incident say their understanding is that the woman filled in a straight Republican ticket on the ballots where preferences had been left blank by voters.

Four campaign staffers of former Rep. Thaddeus McCotter (R-Mich) face multiple criminal charges of allegedly perpetuating election fraud... An investigation by Michigan Attorney General Bill Schuette charged four members of McCotter's Livonia office with violating election laws by submitting fraudulent petition signatures to qualify Congressman McCotter for the 2012 Michigan ballot, the AG said Thursday. "This was not simply Keystone Cops run amok –- serious criminal acts were committed," said Schuette in a press release. “In this case, the process of obtaining signatures and filing petitions to participate in the democratic process was perverted."

It was one of the few — if not the only — coordinated efforts to attempt in-person voter fraud, and it was pulled off by affiliates of conservative activist James O’Keefe at polling places in New Hampshire Tuesday night. All of it part of an attempt to prove the need for voter ID laws that voting rights experts say have a unfair impact on minority voters. Now election law experts tell TPM that O’Keefe’s allies could face criminal charges on both the federal and state level for procuring ballots under false names, and that his undercover sting doesn’t demonstrate a need for voter ID laws at all. Federal law  bans not only the casting of, but the “procurement” of ballots “that are known by the person to be materially false, fictitious, or fraudulent under the laws of the State in which the election is held.” Hamline University law professor  David Schultz told TPM that there’s “no doubt” that O’Keefe’s investigators violated the law.
