Fox News hosts and contributors have campaigned for Republican candidates and organizations from coast to coast this election cycle. According to a Media Matters review, at least 32 Fox News figures have backed Republican efforts in more than 300 instances during the 2011-2012 election cycle. The Fox News personalities have campaigned for Republicans nationally and in more than 40 states. These Fox News campaigners have officially endorsed candidates; advised campaigns; played key roles in fundraisers and events; recorded advertisements and robocalls; and helped direct expenditures to support Republicans and oppose Democrats through Republican-aligned groups.

Republican presidential candidate Mitt Romney is the largest beneficiary of the Fox News campaigning. Five Fox News figures are advising Romney's campaign, and nine have been featured in a Romney event. 

The Fox campaigning involves hundreds of millions of dollars, with participants' activities ranging from collectively being featured in more than 100 fundraisers to advising organizations like American Crossroads and Crossroads GPS.

Media Matters previously examined Fox News personalities who have rallied for Republican causes in prior years, Fox'sactive role in the GOP presidential primary, the network's support for the Tea Party movement, and Fox's four-year campaign to make Barack Obama a one-term president.

Media Matters produced this report based on various Internet searches and an examination of Nexis, Facebook, Twitter, and campaign finance databases such as OpenSecrets.org and FEC.gov. This report is intended to be a snapshot of Fox's campaign activity and not an absolute count. Since many Republican events are not publicly promoted, this report undoubtedly undercounted the extent of Fox's campaigning. 

Twelve Fox News personalities have taken part in Romney's campaign by being featured in a campaign event (such as a fundraiser or speech), advising his campaign, or both. They are: Fred Barnes, John Bolton, Liz Cheney, Alfonse D'Amato, Mike Huckabee, William Kristol, Thomas McInerney, Dennis Miller, Chuck Nash, Walid Phares, Karl Rove, and Pete Snyder.

Five Fox News personalities are advising Romney's campaign:

Nine Fox News personalities have played key roles in Romney events: Fred Barnes, John Bolton, Liz Cheney, Al D'Amato, Mike Huckabee, William Kristol, Dennis Miller, Karl Rove, and Pete Snyder. (Bolton and Cheney have both advised the campaign and been featured in public Romney events.) Additionally, D'Amato is a registered lobbyist who has bundled more than $230,000 for the campaign. Snyder is a regular surrogate for the Romney campaign in Virginia, where he heads the coordinated campaign tasked with winning the battleground state for Romney and other Republicans. And Rove helps direct the super PAC American Crossroads and its affiliated 501(c)(4) organization Crossroads GPS, groups that are spending tens of millions in support of Romney and against Obama.  Elaine Chao, who is not counted in this study, was a Fox News contributor while also serving as the national chair of Asian Americans and Pacific Islanders for Romney. Her contributor status reportedly ended in late August. She is still connected with Fox News, as she was recently nominated and approved to the board of directors for News Corporation, Fox's parent company. Romney won the GOP nomination over former Fox News contributors Rick Santorum and Newt Gingrich. Santorum and Gingrich were Fox News contributors for part of this election cycle, but had their contracts suspended and then eventually terminated as they ramped up their presidential campaigns. Three other Fox News personalities, John Bolton, Mike Huckabee, and Sarah Palin, also considered presidential runs but did not have their contracts suspended.

The Fox News personalities' off-air campaigning has unsurprisingly intersected with their on-air analysis and commentary. (This report did not code Fox News' countless on-air attacks against President Obama and Democrats as a part of the campaign instances.) All personalities listed in this report regularly appear on Fox to discuss current events. Numerous Fox personalities have also directly discussed races in which they're involved off-air. For example:

The Fox News figures have helped raise and spend hundreds of millions of dollars this cycle in support of Republicans. Fox News personalities have been featured in more than 100 fundraisers for Republicans and Republican-aligned groups. The Fox personalities have also advised organizations with big cash reserves like American Crossroads and Crossroads GPS. Here are ten examples of the money involved in Fox's campaign efforts:

Republicans regularly tout Fox News when promoting events featuring Fox personalities. The following are just a few examples pulled from this study:

In some cases, Fox News itself has been used as a reward for Republican donors. Fox News contributor Dick Morris auctioned off a Fox News studio tour during a fundraiser for the Republican Party of Lake County (FL) as part of its March 9 Lincoln-Reagan Day Dinner. Morris was later reprimanded for the auction, and the tour was reportedly canceled after the network learned of it. But Morris did treat a group of donors to Michigan's Oakland County Republican Party to a tour of Fox News and tapings of Lou Dobbs Tonight and Hannity. Participants in that December 2011 visit were being rewarded for donations they made to their local Republican party at a fundraising dinner Morris headlined earlier that year.

The following 32 Fox News hosts and contributors have campaigned for Republican candidates and causes this election cycle:

Borelli is the director of outreach for FreedomWorks, a 501(c)(4) group, which supports its affiliated FreedomWorks super PAC. The FreedomWorks PAC has spent more than $16 million this cycle in support of Republican causes. [FactCheck.org, 4/27/12; FreedomWorks.org, 6/25/12; OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/30/12]

New York Delegation to the Republican National Convention

The Lincoln Club states it supports political efforts and registers "Republican voters." It has only donated to Republican candidates, according to the most recent 2012 FEC data. [LincolnClub.org, accessed 10/31/12; OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/31/12]

The conference is a "gathering for Republicans in Washington State offering a unique forum for lively political debate, networking, and information." [RoanokeConference.org, accessed 10/29/12]

Huckabee is the founder of Huck PAC. [HuckPAC.com, accessed 10/29/12]

Huck PAC has endorsed dozens of Republican local, state, and federal candidates during the 2011-2012 election cycle:

Huck PAC has donated at least $21,000 to GOP federal candidates:

Huck PAC has only given to Republican federal candidates, according to OpenSecrets.org. [OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/26/12]

The organization states that it is committed to "national media efforts to expose President Obama's radical agenda and reach millions of Americans, through radio, TV and the internet to expose the truth about Obama's reckless policies before it's too late." [League of American Voters subscription page, via DickMorris.com, 9/19/12]

On the PAC's website, Morris states that the group is "leading the fight to expose Obama's disastrous record" with anti-Obama ads. The PAC has spent more than $270,000 on independent expenditures against Obama so far this cycle, according to the most recent FEC data. [SuperPACforAmerica.com, accessed 10/25i/12; Media Matters, 10/29/12; OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/30/12]

William J. Kelly for Chairman of the Chicago Republican Party (IL)

JoePAC is the political action committee for Tennessee State Representative Joe Carr (R).

SarahPACPalin is the founder of SarahPAC. [SarahPAC.com, accessed 10/25/12] On its website, SarahPAC has endorsed 16 Republican state and federal candidates during this cycle:

SarahPAC has donated at least $80,000 to GOP federal candidates this cycle:

The Minnesota organization states that it "has targeted four extreme liberals for defeat this fall."

Crossroads is a super PAC which spends tens of millions of dollars to support Republicans and attack Democrats. It has spent more than $77 million thus far, according to the most recent FEC data. [Business Week, 7/26/12; NYTimes.com, accessed 10/25/12; OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/30/12]                                                                        

GPS is a 501(c)(4) group affiliated with American Crossroads that is spending tens of millions to help elect Republicans and attack Democrats. It has spent more than $60 million thus far, according to the most recent FEC data. [Business Week, 7/26/12; NYTimes.com, accessed 10/25/12; OpenSecrets.org, accessed 10/30/12]

Virginia Victory is the "coordinated campaign in charge of winning the state of Virginia for the Republicans in 2012." [VAVictory2012.com, accessed 10/24/12]

Mitt Romney for President. As chairman of Virginia Victory, Snyder coordinates with Republican campaigns such as Romney's to win the state for Republicans. He regularly acts as a surrogate for the Romney campaign. The following are just a few examples:
