GROTON, Conn. — Here in the Submarine Capital of the World, where the business of undersea warfare employs nearly 20,000 people, no one dismisses Mitt Romney’s plan to build three Virginia-class nuclear attack submarines a year instead of the two built each year under President Obama.

But with each submarine costing more than $2 billion, there is skepticism about how to pay for them, even from Representative Joe Courtney, a Connecticut Democrat who in 2007 successfully pushed to have the Navy build two submarines a year instead of one and has been known ever since as “Two Subs Joe.”

“You can definitely make a case” to build three submarines a year, said Mr. Courtney, whose district is home to the Naval Submarine Base New London and to General Dynamics Electric Boat, both in Groton. Nonetheless, the Romney campaign’s math for how to do it, he argued, “is not realistic at all.”

Whoever is right, building more military ships is at the heart of Mr. Romney’s plan to gradually increase military spending to 4 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product, a major increase from the Obama administration’s budget.

Mr. Romney has made what he calls the nation’s underfinanced military a centerpiece of his argument that Mr. Obama has failed to safeguard American strength abroad. Mr. Romney’s advisers say the nation remains woefully vulnerable to the maritime threats of China in the Pacific and Iran in the Persian Gulf.

The Obama administration, which has already moved more ships to the Pacific, counters that Mr. Romney is proposing needless Pentagon budget increases when there is universal agreement that government spending has to be cut.

How many trillions of dollars are at stake remains in dispute. Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. said in his debate with Mr. Romney’s running mate, Representative Paul D. Ryan, that the Romney plan would add $2 trillion to military spending, a figure that Mr. Romney’s advisers have rejected as exaggerated.

But Todd Harrison, a senior fellow for defense budget studies at the nonpartisan Center for Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, has calculated that even if a Romney administration slowly increases the military budget to 4 percent of the G.D.P. over two presidential terms, that would still amount to spending $7.5 trillion over the next decade — or $1.8 trillion more than the Obama administration plans for the Pentagon’s base budget in the same period.

As part of his proposals, Mr. Romney would restore Mr. Obama’s cuts of about 100,000 troops in the Army and the Marines, which he says are vital to the battle-readiness of the nation’s ground forces, and would invest more in missile defense. But his most specific proposals are to increase the reach and power of the Navy, which plays well in the critical battleground states of Florida and Virginia, both home to large naval installations.

Mr. Romney would build 15 ships a year, including 3 submarines, compared with Mr. Obama’s 9 or 10. John F. Lehman, one of Mr. Romney’s top advisers on the military, said the Navy was long overdue for an expansion. “It’s too small, and the world is too large,” Mr. Lehman said in a recent interview, echoing an argument he made when he was President Ronald Reagan’s Navy secretary.

Michèle A. Flournoy, a national security adviser to the president’s campaign and a former top Pentagon official in the Obama administration, countered that it was the capability rather than the number of ships that mattered, and that shipbuilding in the Obama administration had actually increased from the administration of President George W. Bush.

“Sure it’s gone up; I gave them the money,” Dov S. Zakheim, a Romney defense adviser and the Pentagon comptroller under Mr. Bush, told reporters this month. Mr. Zakheim’s argument was that ships take so long to build — a Virginia-class nuclear-powered submarine takes five years to complete — that the money appropriated in the Bush administration is only now being realized in ships that are in service today.
