YAU (Yet Another Update): A lot of people seem to think that the intent was to punish any business that has need to layoff employees. This wasn't the idea at all. The examples below are making a very obvious political play, at the cost of their employees. It's pretty clear, for instance, that Papa Johns could find someplace else to make up for the cost of Obamacare, certainly at least in part. Additionally, if you are trying to save on costs, how does cutting hours back on employees make sense? The work is still there to be done, you'll need to hire more people to make up for the hours that aren't getting worked, so your HR cost will actually go UP, etc. If the idea is to try to limit your employees to a point where you can deny them benefits, I think this is also wrong. Additionally, it's not like Papa Johns is the ONLY company working under the new law, all the shitty delivery pizza places are too. They seem to be fine... wonder what the difference is?

Update: Gotta run out for brunch... wasn't honestly expecting this to take off so fast! I'll be back this afternoon and will update the list. Thanks all!

To Clarify: I'm not necessarily advocating a boycott, etc, as that would potentially just make things worse for the workers involved. I'm more advocating we spread awareness and generate some negative PR.

addtional considerations: Sources are important. There is a post previously HERE (credit mr_majorly for bringing this to my attention) about misleading emails being sent around to make things look dire. Please check sources and don't just post blindly. I'll do my best (hopefully with the help of others) to verify information as it's posted.

Please post company names, what they did/are threatening to do, and the source article.

If this post makes it, I'll do my best to edit this section with names and source articles for every company.

The list so far:

Applebee's - Apparently Obamacare isn't to expensive to keep them from operating their existing restaurants, but is too expensive to open new ones?
