Clearly Mitt Romney has decided the only way that he’ll ever be able to fulfill his destiny of bringing about the third term of Bush/Cheney is to run for Bush’s first term—or President Obama’s second.

For anyone who remembers George W. Bush tripping over himself to agree with Al Gore, lying about his tax plan and rejecting “nation building,” Romney’s fey flirtation with the center is chilling—especially when you know Romney’s 17 Bush/Cheney advisors are stewing in the wings, tuning their war drums.

The difference in 2000 was Bush had nothing to prove to his base and spent a year running as a “Compassionate Conservative.” Romney is banking on six weeks of approximating sanity being enough.

Everyone points out what a brilliant strategic move Romney made at the first debate, as if it’s a good sign that we may elect a president whose expertise—along with avoiding taxes and exporting American jobs—is hiding what he’d actually do in office.

But you can’t deny the success of Romney’s deception.

The Obama campaign—as Romney ran to the right of Rick Perry and picked the author of the most anti-middle-class budget in recent history as his running mate—decided to brand the King of Bain with extremism. This turned his true flaw of “no core” into his greatest strength. He then shifted to the center with a deftness that shocked even the president.

Now, all Mitt has to do is survive just one more week pretending to be moderate and he has somewhat of a chance of winning and taking the country over right as the “real recovery” he’s promising begins.

But Romney’s one problem is that he can’t shut down the Republican Party until November 6.

Following the summer of Republican Senate candidate Todd Akin’s “legitimate rape” comments, we got Republican Senate candidate Richard Mourdock telling us that rape isn’t God’s will, but the rapist’s baby is.

What was Mitt Romney’s response? A statement saying he disagrees with Mourdock’s statement but will continue to support the candidate, allowing the ad he shot endorsing Mourdock to continue airing.

What’s dangerous for Romney about Mourdock’s comments is the “God” part. While most Americans are religious, the extremes of the fundamentalist agenda are exactly the kind of issue that keep Republicans from growing their base.

Here’s a reminder for the GOP: Jesus never mentioned gay people or abortion once. But he sure was pissed at people who didn’t help the poor.

Yet who does the GOP target with their righteous indignation? Gay people, women and… the poor.
