A photo of a sushi lunch, which appears to have been posted by an Apple engineer to his Flickr account before being marked as private, seems to support rumors that the next-generation iPhone will be equipped with an 8 megapixel camera sensor. While the authenticity of the image and its metadata can't be 100 percent verified, our own analysis leads us to believe that the data seems plausible, and can provide us a few clues to the possible camera hardware in the iPhone 5.

The photo, which was quickly marked "private" on Flickr after reports of its origins spread on Wednesday, contains a number of metadata pieces that support the theory that it was taken using an iPhone model not yet in circulation. The account of the person that posted the image lists his job title as "Apple Software Engineer," the GPS coordinates point to office space at 1 Infinite Loop, and the time it was taken is marked as 11:52am (lunch time!). Additionally, the original caption on Flickr read, "Lunch at work: Uni (sea urchin), hirame (wild halibut), sake (wild Alaskan salmon), avocado roll." And, as some readers may know, Apple's corporate cafeteria is known for, among other delicacies, its sushi.

While EXIF metadata can certainly be faked, the combination of details at least makes sense. Assuming the data is genuine, we can make a number of conclusions about the iPhone 5's camera.

The photo's resolution is about 5MP, but the final pixel dimensions (2291 x 2235) don't match the existing iPhone 4 (2592 x 1936). The photo is clearly cropped—it's not a common 4:3 ratio, and the EXIF data tells us the original resolution was 3264 x 2448 pixels. That just so happens to be the exact resolution as both OmniVision's latest 1/3.2" 8MP backside illuminated sensor as well as Sony's 1/3.2" 8MP Exmor R sensor.

OmniVision supplied the 1/3.2" 5MP backside-illuminated camera sensors for the iPhone 4, so its OV8830 sensor could almost be a drop-in replacement. However, Sony's CEO claimed earlier this year that its "best" sensors (i.e., the Exmor R) were being supplied to Apple for its mobile devices. Which one of these sensors could come with the iPhone 5 is hard to say, but both have been rumored as replacements—one rumor even suggested that Apple was dual-sourcing sensors from both Sony and OmniVision.

Other details in the EXIF metadata tell us a little bit more about the camera hardware. For instance, the maximum aperture of the lens is listed as f/2.4, while the maximum aperture of the iPhone 4 is f/2.8. That's about a third of a stop brighter, but it also appears that the 8MP sensor itself is about a third of a stop slower than the one in the iPhone 4. Essentially, the improvement in aperture was necessary to compensate for the sensitivity decrease.

Another change we noted is that the lens focal length is listed as 4.28mm, as opposed to the iPhone 4 focal length of 3.85mm. Last year we noted that the iPhone 4 used a larger sensor than previous models while keeping the focal length the same. This gave the iPhone 4 a significantly wider angle of view, comparable to about 28mm on a 35mm format camera, while previous iPhone models were closer to a 40mm equivalent. The focal length for this assumed iPhone 5 prototype is more like 33mm equivalent—not a huge change, but framing in tight spaces will be a little harder.

We suspect that the focal length was changed either as a design constraint due to the increased megapixel count, or perhaps Apple is using Sony's optics paired with the Exmor R sensor. For comparison, we dug up some specs on the Sony Ericsson Xperia Arc, which uses the 8MP Exmor R sensor. Its lens has a focal length of 4.1mm with an f/2.4 maximum aperture.

Looking at the image at 100 percent magnification tells us that images from an 8MP sensor will be at least as noisy (or "grainy") as those from the iPhone 4. It's a rather subjective analysis, but closely examining the noise leads us to believe the sensor that took this picture is an OmniVision and not the Sony Exmor R. There are more similarities in contrast, sharpness, and noise between iPhone 4 samples than samples from the Xperia Arc. Even this analysis is not conclusive, however; Sony and Apple could be applying vastly different processing to the raw data coming from the sensors before saving the final file as a JPEG.

We can understand Apple's move to 8MP as an effort to remain "competitive" with the large assortment of Android devices with 8MP cameras. Sony has demonstrated that its Exmor R sensors can perform exceptionally well in low light compared to other sensors of comparable size. We don't have such a demonstration for the OmniVision sensor, but we do know it's significantly less sensitive than the iPhone 4's 5MP sensor. We're holding out hope, however, that the new camera doesn't come with a major compromise in low-light performance, no matter the supplier. From the looks of this sample photo, though, it seems users won't be gaining any significant quality improvement for the increase in file size.
