It is the latest in a long line of leaks surround Apple's new iPhone.

But the newest video claims to show something no other leak has - an iPhone with a larger, 4 inch screen being switched on.

It comes amid a flurry of leaks claiming to reveal the new handset.

The video, which was upload to YouTube by an anonymous users, claims to show an iPhone 5 new to an iPhone 4S.

In the video, the new handset's controversial connector can be clearly seen, along with the larger 4 inch screen.

However, the user is unable to get past the 'connect to iTunes' messages on the screen, suggesting that while they may have the handset, they may not have a cable - or are concerning about Apple tracking them should they connect it to a PC to activate it.

It is believed the new handset will use a new type of display called an in-cell panel that allows the handset to be thinner.

The new technology that makes the smartphone's screen thinner by integrating touch sensors into the LCD, eliminating the need for a separate touch-screen layer.

However, in-cell panels are believed to be technologically more difficult to mass produce compared than conventional LCD panels, and it is already believed one of the three firms making the panels, Sharp, is behind on its manufacturing.

The latest video comes amid a flurry of last minute leaks.

A Taiwanese pop star casually shared photographs of his brand new 'iPhone 5' with his 13.5 million followers this week on Weibo

'Today I confirmed that the iPhone 5 will be longer and have an aluminum back like the iPad,' Jimmy Lin wrote, sharing that the new Apple phone will indeed have a smaller USB connector, much to many's chagrin.

Though information has been known to leak about Apple's secretive phone updates, many have dismissed Mr Lin's new toy as just another knock off.

After Mr Lin shared several photographs of his new device, it was shared more than 80,000 times across the web, according to The Next Web.

'While it has a four-inch screen, it’s thinner, though it feels about the same in the hand,' he said. 'The headphone jack has also been moved to the bottom.'

Mr Lin has skyrocketed to fame thanks to his singing, acting and race card driving career.

He appeared to confirm Apple fan's biggest fear that the tech company would be phasing out their old USB design, making many Apple compatible devices obsolete.

'As for the dock connector, the iPhone 5 doesn’t use the 30-pin connector, instead changing to a smaller 19-pin connector,' he said.

Sharing numerous photographs of his phone, many have debunked it as a high quality fake due to the irregularities on the front and back of the device and it's cheap looking bottom.

The fifth incarnation of the smartphone, which despite its hefty price tags still commands a huge chunk of the market, is expected to launch this October, a year on from the launch of the 4S.

So far, purported leaks of the phone's casing have been circulating, but the company has declined to comment or confirm on the device's updates.
