We have been hearing about Apple’s interest in NFC for quite a bit of time now. In the past, there were rumors about Apple working on embedded RFID chips and even tools that would enable using your iPhone as a replacement to conventional keys. While none of these features have ever made it to the final version of the iPhone, Apple continues to search on it and based on the possibilities we hope that future iPhones will finally get one of these features.

For those of you who don’t know, NFC stands for Near Field Communication. It is a short range wireless technology that enables devices to communicate with each other to perform simple transactions. This technology has been in use in countries like Japan and South Korea but has yet to take off in the United States. Cult of Mac however claims that Apple is seriously contemplating bringing a form of NFC technology to its next generation iPhone. This technology could allow iPhone users to run any compatible Mac as their own Mac.

Are you confused by the whole concept? Let us explain. The NFC ready iPhone would basically carry all the small chunks of data (which includes your applications, settings, and data) that it would wireless transfer to a Mac near it making it run like it was your own Mac. once you close the session or when your iPhone goes out of range, the Mac is turned into a “normal one.” Note that locally stored data on the iPhone would always be small and include things like bookmarks, passwords, and documents. If the user needs full access to the files, music files or pictures, or any large amounts of data, it could be sourced from a cloud service that the feature would come bundled with. While all of this does sound exciting, we wonder if the technology will be available in time for the next generation iPhone.

What do you think? Would you like something like this on the iPhone 5? Let us know in the comments below!

As usual, stay tuned for any news and info on the topic by following us on Twitter and/or subscribing to our RSS feed.
