Small tablets abound these days, each with its own set of advantages. The Kindle Fire HD screams ease-of-use. The Nexus 7 is a speed demon. The iPad mini has a formidable ecosystem behind it. And now comes Barnes & Noble’s Nook HD, making a play for your eyeballs.

Note: While we tested the Nook HD with software that was “near-final, but still pre-production.” There may be small changes in the final release.

The new HD version of the 7-inch Nook tablet. It's Android, with a heavy Barnes & Noble skin.

Avid content consumers. Especially those who have already bought a lot of ebooks, magazines, and videos from Barnes & Noble.

It’s very light at 11.1 ounces--the iPad mini weighs in at 10.88 oz--though it’s a bit thicker than competing tablets, .09 inches more than the already slightly bulky Kindle Fire HD. The back is a bulbous soft plastic that makes it feel a little toy-like--some might say cheap--but maybe that makes it more drop-proof?

The Nook HD is really just a vessel for interfacing with Barnes & Noble’s content store, and then viewing that content. It has a web browser and a basic email client, and you can get more apps through Barnes & Noble’s store. A note of caution: You won't have access to the full Google Play app selection. It's a curated group of apps, even more limited than the Amazon Appstore. While the Nook HD is built on Android 4.0 software, it’s been redesigned to where it’s almost unrecognizable.

At the top of the display is your most recently viewed stuff, which is a carousel you can swipe through and interact with. There are permanent shortcuts at the bottom of the display to Library, Apps, Web, Email, and Shop, and five total desktop spaces that you can swipe between and populate with books, magazines, apps, and movies.

They screen. Hellllooooooo, beautiful! Barnes and Noble really put all of its eggs in this basket. 1440x900 pixels nets you 243 pixels per inch, soundly beating everything else in the 7-inch category (the 7-inch Kindle Fire HD has 216 ppi). Magazines and graphic novels really pop and are extremely clear. Videos look good, too.

Speed. Or lack thereof. Despite the fact that it’s based on the same kernel as the Kindle Fire HD, it just doesn’t run as smoothly. Apps don’t pop open right away, scrolling stutters. It takes longer than it should to do pretty much anything.

The Nook HD has two speakers. “Great!” you say. “Now my movies will be in stereo!” Not so fast. The speakers are on the corners of the shorter side of the Nook HD, which means that while they play stereo in portrait, in landscape they're side-by-side. When you watch a movie, it feels like you've gone deaf in one ear.

We found battery life to be a bit better than the Nexus 7 and a bit worse than the Kindle Fire HD. You should get about 10 hours of read time, depending on your usage. The Nook HD makes a strong case for itself versus the Fire HD with its killer screen, better browser, and expandable storage, even though it’s not as easy to use. If you’re already invested in the Barnes & Noble ecosystem, then maybe. But even then, it's hard to make an argument. The Nexus 7 and Kindle Fire HD are both more capable, and if you do have a lot sunk into B&N, you can just download the Nook app for the Nexus 7. [Nook] • Storage: 8GB or 16GB + up to 64GB microSD
