This is the gift of the computer age: Things once considered too numerous to count can now be counted.

As a result, computers have shattered and rebuilt many industries such as retail, banking, publishing and media.

Now, for the first time in history, there is a scientific basis for medicine. This means the destruction of the health care industry, as we know it.

How many of you have heard of Larry Smarr?

Larry is an astrophysicist and computer scientist. But he is more famous for studying his own feces.

Do you know how much information is in your stool?

There are about 100 billion bacteria per gram. Each bacterium has DNA containing 1 million bytes of information. This means human stool has a data capacity of 100,000 terabytes of information stored per gram.

That’s many orders of magnitude more information density than, say, in a chip in your iPhone or your personal computer.

So your stool is far more interesting than a computer.

Larry’s goal is to replace the guesswork presently guiding individual health decisions with specific guidance tailored to the particular details of each person’s body. Specifically, he is creating a working computational model of your body and not just some generalized atlas of the human frame, but a working model of your unique corpus, grounded in your own genome and refreshed continually with measurements from your body’s insides.

According to Larry, “We are going to know each of your cells’ 6 billion genome bases, with all the imaging down to the micron level. After that, there will be no more data to know. By 2030, you are going to know the whole wiring diagram of your own body.”

Once they are armed with the wiring diagram, Larry sees no reason why individuals cannot maintain their health the way modern car owners maintain their automobiles.

If he is right, the impact on medicine will be revolutionary.

Highlights of talk given at Peking Union Medical College in September 2012. Material adapted from article by Mark Bowden in the Atlantic. Full article here.

Interested in meeting some of the hottest health care startups in China? Check out our next Beijing Tech Hive taking place Oct 26-28, 2012. What is Beijing Tech Hive? Check out our video on Youku.
