Does anyone remember their first computer? Remember how long it took to load that game of Doom and how often it would crash if you tried to send an email and listen to the free music that came with Windows at the same time?! Well, thankfully technology has come a hell of a long way since then, but the same basic principles remain the same: no, nothing to do with flesh-eating zombies and crappy classical music, but that using more space means that your computer and/or iPhone will run slower. So, here at good old iPhoneAppCafe, we decided to compile five to tips that will help you free up space on your iPhone, meaning that it will run as quickly as it did when it was fresh out of the packet!

How To: Delete your iPhone’s Unnecessary Apps

What? Delete my Apps? Are you crazy? Surely an iPhone App website would see such an act as murder, or manslaughter at the very least?! Well, without wanting to get into a moral and legal battle here, we see it more as a form of euthanasia. You see, there are some Apps that are either not worth the masses of space that they take up, fun, but rarely used, or just plain crap. You should free your iPhone of these cluttering, cumbersome Applications by devising a list of the Apps that you use the least, then holding your thumb down on their logo until the screen shakes and press the ‘x’ in the corner of the App. This will delete the app and all of the memory that it is using up, leaving your iPhone as fresh as a daisy!

How To: Use Free Memory Monitoring Apps for your iPhone

Well, once you’ve deleted a few unnecessary Apps from your iPhone, then you will have more room for another App! However, this App is one that is actually designed to help you free up space on your iPhone and monitor how much free storage you have left. There are a few to choose from at the Apple Store, but ones such as the aptly named, ‘Free Memory’ allow you to monitor your battery life as well as your iPhone’s memory, meaning that you can will have faster and longer use of your iPhone.

How To: Clear your iPhone’s Browser History

Your iPhone will automatically keep a history of all of the web pages that you have searched for and visited; if you browse the web fairly often, this means that there will be a lot of history, therefore a lot of space will be being used to store this. To clear your iPhone’s browser history, simply select ‘Settings’, ‘Safari’ and press ‘Clear History’; concurrently, to delete your browsers cookies, (which can also take up a fair amount of space), just go to ‘Settings’, ‘Safari’ and click ‘Clear Cookies’. This will also have the added benefit of stopping anyone finding out what you have been looking at on the web…what? I’ve got nothing to hide! Just check my history…oh yeah, you can’t!

How To: Delete Unnecessary Media Files from your iPhone

Media files are one of the most space-filling elements on your iPhone; videos and photos can take up so much space that your iPhone will stop working properly and you will be confused as to why it is taking you twenty minutes to send a text message and an hour to access the web. What you should do is back all of the photos and videos that you wish to keep up on to your computer, or iPod or any other external hard drive that has the capacity to store them and then delete them from your phone by simply selecting ‘Delete Photo/Video?’ This will fee up a gigantic amount of space for you to fill with…more videos?!

How To: Free Huge Amounts of Space on your iPhone’s iTunes

Ok, we’ve really saved the best until last here. If you are anything like me, then the majority of your iPhone’s space is taken up by music. Music that I have stored on my iPod, my Computer and backed up on my external hard drive. I do not need all of this music on my iPhone and neither do you! All you have to do to make your iPhone feel as if it has your entire back catalogue of tunes stored on it is create a Smart Playlist in iTunes and transfer it on to your iPhone! You can select which genre you want to hear, give each song ratings and limit it to certain amounts of songs or other items such as videos or podcasts to fill a smaller amount of space on your iPhone; then just plug in, sync and enjoy the benefits of loads more space, plus an eclectic, refreshed musical playlist!
