Apple is a company that provokes strong emotions in people. They're polarising - into users and not, fanboys and haters. Not everyone falls squarely into a category but many do, it's the tech world's politics.

But like politics, it's often pointless and shows people at their worst. The dominant sect on reddit seems to be 'haters' who want to be martyred for it. (Anyone else underwhelmed? There, I said it!). This isn't because the fanboys don't exist, they're just less numerous/successful, so it becomes something of an echo chamber - it's less rewarding to present a view sympathetic to Apple because the reaction's often pretty negative.

With that said, this is my attempt to provide a little counterpoint without coming across as a fanboy.

The idea that the iPad is junk because of technical shortcoming X ignores history. The iPod had "no wireless, less space than a nano, Lame". The iPhone had no 3G, no apps, not enough storage, and so on. Apple makes popular products (iPod), flops (Apple TV), and everything in between. Success hinges on whether people like them, and tech specs seem to be a fairly small part of that. It doesn't run OS X because it's not "your computer". I understand people wanting their devices to be general purpose computers speaking as peers over a network. I've done that myself; I bought an iPod touch and jailbroke it so I could pull up a terminal. It turns out I'm just as happy using it as a satellite appliance to my real computer. While it's not a strong preference, I've got no doubt that most people can relate to desktop computer + iPad much more easily than desktop computer + laptop computer. Speaking of my iPod touch, if it had a ten inch screen I'd do most of my web browsing on it, even when near my desk. I don't know if that's true for others, it just occurred to me, but that's potentially a pretty big deal. No multitasking, but it'll have tabs for sure. The truth was no cooler than the rumours, which is disappointing. Apple deserves some flak for that, they allowed the hype to get too big and probably encouraged it. But nobody can go out and buy the product you thought Apple might be launching, and it's not competing with the products that you imagined it knocking off the shelf (see: netbooks). The web is more or less every book and newspaper you could want, and the vast majority of people don't have a web browser in a book-like form factor. If I want a recipe on the kitchen bench I have to print it out, and if I can't walk up to someone and hand them a webpage to look at. There's no way they would have put this thing together, signed up publishers, and launched iBooks, if the screen was as hard to read as people are speculating. It might not look like paper, but the high-res LCDs in iPhones are fine to read on, just too damn small. Someone finally has some leverage against Adobe as gatekeepers of video-on-the-web, and is working with Google to get Flash out of YouTube. Even (especially!) if you don't want an iPad, that's good news. (Whatever your position on H.264, it's better than SWF+H.264).

There's plenty of flaws with it - the mobile data situation sucks; crippling the multitasking is insane (it's there, just not for user apps); walled app garden is problematic; needs more storage and a camera; and so on. The pricing is pretty good, somewhat unusually. It's not worth it for me (what disposable income?), and I wouldn't buy the first revision even if it was, but failing to see how people could love this shows a lack of imagination. Reddit, I expect better!
