If you’re like me, you are a pretty heavy user of the Google Maps and YouTube apps on Apple Inc.’s (AAPL) iPhone and iPad.

And like me, you probably will be startled and unhappy that those apps are missing from the latest operating system for Apple’s mobile ecosystem, as well as the ones that come installed on the new iPhone 5.

Apple and Google Inc. (GOOG) recently have been in a rather high-profile breakup, as the latter continues to develop its Android mobile operating system that has made strong market gains. Apple, as one might imagine, is a bit miffed. So the folks from Cupertino, Calif., have removed the two popular (too popular?) apps from the home screens of devices running the latest iOS 6, rolled out Wednesday for current users of a recent vintage, and have offered their own map app for iOS.

As for YouTube, Apple has removed the native app and replaced it with nothing.

Apple has allowed a Google YouTube app in the App Store, but to date it’s only specifically designed for the iPhone; iPad users will need to download the new YouTube iPhone app and toggle the 2x button on their screens.

So in the avalanche of stories and blogs and tweets running up to the iPhone 5 going on sale Friday, look for a number of customers to express some buyer’s remorse when they open those elegant little boxes.

For starters, the YouTube app leaves a lot to be desired. It’s easy enough to navigate, but the experience is markedly different from the original native app. Its search function is less complete, and it returns far fewer results. One could be forgiven for surmising that perhaps Apple’s business side is looking to degrade the YouTube user experience to cut into Google’s momentum. That’s just a theory, but it would not be the first time that Apple came under some criticism for exercising, shall we say, a firm control over the user experience.

The new Apple Maps app has been discussed at greater length in cyberspace. Suffice to say that it’s lacking in a few meaningful areas, including the absence — at least for the moment — of any satellite view, that neat perspective on geography.

The navigational advice seems accurate after an informal, unscientific and personal exploration of the tool, but others have found some more glaring examples of its deficiency. Users over at Business Insider report some real blunders.

Here are a few of our favorites via The Amazing iOS 6 Maps on Tumblr and be sure to check out #ios6maps on Twitter. Don’t forget to visit our national monuments.

Follow The Tell blog on Twitter @thetellblog
