If you can’t be bothered to wait for the iPhone 5, then how about this?

A German engineer has created a 10 times scale version of the iPhone 4 with a 40 inch screen which offers iPhone-esque computer functions - but also doubles up as a table.

The ‘iTableous’ has exactly the same design as the Apple mobile right down to the on and off buttons, the camera and the accelerometer.

It is covered by 8mm strong plexiglass and can flip onto its side to make using it more easy.

But before you start placing your order, be aware that the iTableous isn't quite as hi-tech as it might appear. It does not have a touchscreen and can’t even be used to make phone calls.

Its creator Benjamin Bachmeier has admitted that it functions more like a desktop computer, although it can connect to the Internet via wireless 3G.

The iTableous is 118cm long and 58.9cm wide, around 10 times larger than the iPhone 4, which is 11.5cm long and 5.8cm wide.

It uses a 40inch 920 x 1080 Toyota LCD monitor instead of a touch screen - so while you can't control it with a finger-swipe, it is at least satisfyingly large.

Users operate the computer using a keyboard and a mouse sitting on or next to the screen.

Just like a real iPhone the speakers are at the bottom of the case, only these ones are powered with a subwoofer, two mid range tweeters and two other speakers.

The Home button does not work but lifts up to hide a 30-pin connector - so you can connect devices, including, oddly, a real iPhone.

The iTableous runs off Windows 7 and Mac OS X 10.6.7 and has a 500GB hard disk and 4GB of RAM being powered by a GHz Zotac Ionitx processor.

At the top just where the camera should be Mr Bachmeier has installed a 5.7-megapixel HD camera right which allows video conferencing when connected to the Internet.

He has also converted what is normally the sleep button to a giant power switch.

Other parts include a flap which appears to be a giant SIM card cover, but actually opens up to let you look at the circuitry inside.

The connections include a line-in port, one USB 2.0 port as per an Apple computer, a SuperDrive, two HDMI ports and a DVB-T antenna cable.

The swinging function flips the entire device 90 degrees on its side so the user can sit on the floor whilst using it.

The other alterations include four internal fans plus an additional one Mr Bachmeier has fashioned himself to reduce the noise of the computer.
