The white iPhone 4 looks as though it will never appear on the market due to all the delays. But one enterprising teenager called Fei Lam came up with a very lucrative idea. He decided to import the white iPhone 4 casing parts to the U.S. himself direct from Foxconn. He then offered a conversion service to anyone wanting their black iPhone made white.

And guess what? Lots of people did and Lam has apparently generated around $130,000 in revenue so far. He sells front and back panels or full conversion kits for $279 through the website WhiteiPhone4Now with the tag line, “You don’t have to wait until Spring of 2011.”

The only problem now is some mysterious private investigator is bugging Lam stating he is selling stolen goods. Lam believes it is Apple attempting to block what he is doing, or some trademark firm trying to make a quick buck by copying the action Apple is taking against eBay sellers.

What’s unclear here is how Lam managed to get the parts from Foxconn who are under contract to Apple. Is it a case that Foxconn has stock piles of these cases and just wants to get rid of them, or is Lam’s supplier not really an official contact at the manufacturing firm?

One thing that is clear, though. If you want an iPhone 4 in white this seems to be the only way to get one at the moment.

There’s something fishy here. If Foxconn is selling the white cases to Lam, then why is Apple not shipping white iPhones already? It could be the batches are so small that doesn’t makes sense to Apple, but Lam buying a few hundred or so at a time sounds feasible.

Also, has anyone ever met anyone using one of these kits, or heard talk of them on forums? Do they actually exist or is Lam’s website just a front? I have to ask because I’ve never heard of it before yet he’s managed to generate so much revenue.

If Apple knows this is happening then they’d stop the shipments from Foxconn immediately. If they know and this continues then clearly the cases aren’t coming through legitimate channels from the Chinese company.
