Yahoo has a preview of the upcoming iPhone application Messenger sneak peek. Following the sale of text, you can now “The Best of Messenger with you, wherever you are.” Apart from any allergic reactions, you can also abuse of the color purple, how does the new application appear to keep?

The nearly enough to see the screen of the iPhone, said the existing AIM. You start with a scrolling list of contacts, with their avatars and the rule that you can click for a video. The image with the new in both directions, similar to the iPhone SMS to talk about bubbles and used for maintenance.

Messenger integrated access to the iPhone, the camera and image library, so that the images as part of the interview. This is a bonus of several features of the program a little extra boost. Another feature allows you to SMS messages directly from the application to send to your friends Phones. It offers a free service, the text with friends, without your SMS allowance.

Another feature is the application of “no SignOut” Design “. This is what you signed in the service of Yahoo, even if the phone is sleeping or leaving the employment of another application. Your status automatically is in standby mode, do not you cut your ongoing discussions. If the Apple-push notifications to a reality, your queue is relatively short term, is considered a badge of chance ‘ application is exactly the type of use of this technology was designed for. The introduction of “special Hibernation in the version 2.2.x of the application, Yahoo has been shown that if 3.x functions go.

While the Yahoo walk through some of the iPhone “thud.” I doubt that many users want the iPhone in all the web addresses to their status messages of the video suggested the possible. There is a big difference between the function of an application on a simulator with a Mac keyboard and using the same function on an iPhone with a touchscreen. (At least Yahoo knows something about the models of the iPhone, that is we do.)

Apart from that, what the video shows the next Messenger provides some solid, well designed, and purple. Messenger you can experience the same principles already using SMS, AIM, symposium and other applications, but when it provides a reliable and robust is a ready to use, installed in the public of what has already more than instant messaging messaging on the computer.


