Hi. Micro controllers are useful for a great many things. One very practical application of micro electronics is to bridge together the real world and the digital world. For this project, we are going to show how you can control this remote controlled car with this iPhone. The first thing we did was to take apart the remote control and this is what we saw. This is a pretty simple car which doesn’t allow for speed control, just forward or reverse for each of the two motors. From this picture, you can see that the left and right joysticks both just press on these metal tabs and connect them down to the wires underneath. With a multi meter, we quickly found that the metal tabs are connected to ground and the wires underneath corresponded to forward and reverse directions. So, to hijack that behaviour, we soldered long wires onto those four nodes. Using a transistor driven by the micro controller, we can electronically over ride the joy sticks by connecting the right ones to ground on a particular motor to go forward or backward. So, we just need these four wires going to four transistors on the nerd kit’s breadboard. The micro controller turns on the right transistor when it wants a certain behaviour. We also tapped into the battery connectors to power the nerd kit. Here’s an overview of how our system works. The iPhone talks over wireless to computer. The computer sends information to the nerd kit, and the nerd kit controls the remote control that controls the car. So, let’s go over what we did. The iPhone is running a very simple web script to figure out where you are touching on the screen. It’s using the iPhone web API that has JavaScript support for advanced touch events like on touch start, and on touch move. This web script is running on a web server on the same computer that is hooked up to the nerd kit. As you can see from the relative simplicity of the code, the iPhone java script API is fairly easy to use. Here, we just defined functions to keep track of where your finger is on the screen. Every time it has a new value, it sends the x y coordinates of your finger using an asynchronous java script call to another page. Now that we have the coordinates of your finger on the iPhone, we need to get that information over to the nerd kit. We already showed how we can do this with a Python script that writes information over the serial port to the nerd kit. But how can a web script give information to a running Python script? Well, to do this we use something called pipe. Pipes are what we use in programming for different processes to talk to each other. PHP treats a name pipe just like a file. So, you just open a file and write information into it, on the other side the pipe on script opens the file and just reads the information from it, and writes it over a serial port into the nerd kit. With the nerd kit hooked up and ready to turn the controller on or off, we just need to read in the value from the serial port and figure out a way to run the motor at that speed. To do this, we use a technique called Pulse Width Modulation or PWM. Basically we pulse the pin on the nerd kit ON and OFF very quickly, and what we do is control the width of each pulse. When we want the car to go quicker, we make the pulses wider, keeping the motor on for a big portion of the time. When we want the car to go slower, we make the pulses smaller, keeping the motor ON for a smaller portion of the time, and therefore making the car go slower. Apart from controlling the car from the phone, this project also improves the car. Because we are using PWM to drive the motor, we have some sort of the velocity control where we did not have before. In this video, we showed how you can use different technologies along with our nerd kit to perform a fairly complicated sort of tasks. This is just one example of cool things you can do with your nerd kit. From our videos like this one or more information about our kits, please visit us at www.nerdkits.com.
