Last month, after reading about it on TechCrunch, I downloaded and tried Earthscape, a program for the iPhone that mimicked much of what the wonderful Google Earth does on traditional computer. Unfortunately, I found it to be a disappointment – it was slow and hard to use. It left me pining for a real Google Earth on the iPhone, and I deleted it.

Sunday, my desire for the real thing was fulfilled. Google Earth was released for the iPhone, and it’s a spectacular app that you’ll want immediately.

As with the desktop version, you begin with the Earth floating in space. Tapping on the image zooms in, and you can use the pinching gesture to more precisely zoom in and out.

Continue to tap, and you’ll eventually be down to street level.

Google Earth uses the accelerometer in the iPhone to let you move around on the map, or angle it for a horizon view.

As with Google Maps on the iPhone, it works with the device’s GPS. Tapping the locator icon in the lower left-hand corner of the screen takes you to your current location, indicated by the familiar blue dot.

Google Earth for the desktop features multiple layers, so you can overlay information on top of the maps. For now, there are only two layers in the iPhone version. You an get Wikipedia information for a specific location if the appropriate article has been geo-tagged. There don’t seem to be too many of these, but perhaps the release of this software will encourage authors to geotag more Wikipedia entries.

And see the little blue squares in the screen shots above? Those are where photos have been tagged with location data in Panaramio, a site designed to link images with spots on the globe. Tapping on one of the squares brings up an image at that location.

Google Earth for iPhone duplicates some of the features in the Google Maps application, such as being able to search for local businesses. The two are semi-linked – you can tap on a location in Google Earth and go to the same spot in Google Maps, but not vice versa. To get back to Google Earth, it must re-launch, a downside of Apple not allowing apps to run in the background on the iPhone.

There are a few annoyances. The accelerometer is sensitive, and easy for the screen to "drift" away from the view you want. Fortunately, you can turn off this feature. Also, Google Earth starts with the globe view every time it starts, then slowly zooms back down to the vicinity of your last location. This gets old quickly.

Finally, because it uses your phone’s GPS, your battery level takes a beating – particularly since this app is so much fun, you’ll spend a lot of time working with it.

If you’re an iPhone or iPod Touch user, you’ll want to get this application ASAP. It’s free, as you’d expect.

Read more at the Google Earth blog. I also like Harry McCracken’s review at Technologizer.
