As I mentioned in Friday’s post regarding the expected announcement today about the next-generation iPhone, I wasn’t particularly enamored of the original. There were several things about it that kept it from being the Object of My Desire, including its virtual keyboard, its lack of 3G network support, the inability to do a simple copy/cut/paste, the fact that it wouldn’t work with my employer’s Exchange e-mail servers.

The phone – should it really be unveiled today during Steve Jobs’ noon CDT keynote address to Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference – is expected to have 3G support, and Apple has already shown off support for Exchange. As an AT&T customer, those features make it more tempting, but it’s not a lock that I’ll snatch one up.

If Steve wants more of my cash, here are some features I really want to see in an iPhone 2.0. Give me a critical mass of these, and I’ll bite.

• Real GPS – The current iPhone’s and iPod Touch’s simulated GPS service is nifty, but when you’re lost in the rain in Juarez and it’s Easter-time, too, you need a more accurate fix on your location.

• Video recording – The free phones I can get from AT&T an record video. Why can’t the overpriced iPhone do it?

• Lower price – One of the rumors floating around is that Apple will cut the price of the new iPhone dramatically, possibly to as much as $200. This will likely be tied to a subsidy from AT&T, which usually are limited to new accounts or existing customers whose contract periods have expired. Hey, Apple & AT&T: How about rewarding current, loyal customers by giving them the subsidized price, too? Why do cell phone companies treat their current subscribers like second-class customers?

• Cut/Copy/Paste – Those most basic touchscreen Windows Mobile phones can do this, and it’s silly that the iPhone doesn’t. Here’s a chance to fix one of the iPhone’s biggest failings.

• Video chat – This is another one of the big rumors, and the ability to do video chat on an iPhone – coupled with video recording – would be outstanding. Also intriguing: Releasing a version of iChat for Windows! 

• User-replaceable battery – While the furor over the iPhone’s sealed battery has died down, I expect that’s only because most of the current models in circulation haven’t been around enough yet to develop battery issues. It’s only a matter of time before this design flaw becomes apparent, and Apple has a chance to address it with version 2.0. But, judging from the design of the MacBook Air, they probably won’t. Sigh.

What would it take to push you over the edge?

Check back this afternoon. Whatever Jobs unveils today in his speech, I’ll detail it here. And if you you’d like to track liveblogs from those attending the event, Laughing Squid has a list.

Update: As often happens before the company announces new products, Apple’s online store is down this morning.

Update 2.0: The keynote is ongoing, and so far it’s been a parade of developers showing off their new iPhone applications. Best coverage: MacRumors, Engadget, Gizmodo, Wired. I like MacRumors’ process best, it auto-updates in a seamless way.

Most interesting app so far: Moo Cow Music’s Band, which lets you make music on the iPhone.

The iPhone 2.0 software will be released in July, free for iPhone owners, but iPod Touch owners will pay $9.95.

Update 3.0: Jobs says Apple’s launching a new syncing service called MobileMe at www.me.com (nothing there yet) that also will use Web 2.0 applications to work with data. The apps, based on the images shown at Engadget’s blog, look just like Mac OS applications for calendar, photos, e-mail, etc. And they will work on Windows as well as Macintosh computers.

MobileMe replaces .Mac – one of the rumors in advance of this event – and will cost $99. There’s a 60-day trial.

Update 4.0: Finally! Jobs says the new phone is called the iPhone 3G. From MacRumors’ blog:

Jobs says the newer phone is 2.8 times faster than the original, which ran on AT&T’s Edge network. Of course, as lame as Edge is, this would not be hard to do. But Jobs says it’s also faster than other 3G phones, and the battery life is better than many 3G phones. Again, from MacRumors:

And the new phone has GPS support, in addition to being able to get a location from Wi-Fi sources and cell-phone towers.

The rumors about pricing were correct: the new iPhone 3G 8-gigabyte will sell for $199, the 16-GB model will be $299. They go on sale in 22 countries on July 11.

Frankly, I’m a little underwhelmed. GPS, 3G, a little thinner, plastic back and, of course, much cheaper. I expected a more whiz-bang features packed into the second generation. However, what’s here is intriguing, and I am leaning toward buying one, with the biggest lure being the price – it’s now competitive with many other smart phones on the market.

It’s also interesting to see which rumors were wrong. There’s no video chat, no iChat for Windows, no ability to capture video, no cut/copy/paste. Oh well . . . maybe next time.

Oh, and the Apple store is back up. Here’s
