For those of you that missed this first campaign it is not to late. 5 day campaign running from June 22 - 27 for maker faire.

The need for a truly portable opensource 3D printer has finally been filled. Tantillus provides easy computer-less printing in a stunning beautifully small package. With the ability to reproduce its entire case Tantillus comes the closest any RepRap has to being a self reproducing machine.

I am releasing a limited number of units at this price to ensure all order can be filled in a timely manner and to get feedback from the community.

Please note that this is a flexible funding campaign and all perks will be shipped regardless of reaching the set goal.

All source files and models will be released the day the campaign ends regardless of funding.

If you have any questions please feel free to ask.

The RepRap project was conceived in 2004 by Dr. Adrian Bowyer to build an opensource machine capable of making usable items in 3 dimensions and eventually be able to make complete copies of itself. Only a short time after the idea had been seeded the RepRap project was born. In the spring of 2007 the very first Replicating Rapid-prototyper was built at Bath University in the U.K. which started a landslide of development over the past 5 years to bring us to this point. Essentially we now have a desktop factory for your home capable of making replacement parts for all your broken toys, gadgets and remote controls missing battery covers.

I, myself, became interested in the project the minute I learned about it in 2009 and began building my first RepStrap made out of salvaged 2D printer parts in 2010. This is where the story of Tantillus begins.

The need for Tantillus After printing with my Repstrap for a few months I decided to build a Prusa Mendel which was the newest and most actively developed machine. After printing with the Prusa for a year and taking it on trips I urgently wanted a more portable machine and decided to design one with a fully printed case. What was born was Tantillus. Once pictures of this original all printed bot had been released to the public I received a flurry of emails requesting to buy one. Knowing I could never print enough cases to meet demand, I decided to design a case that used laser cut acrylic panels as to increase productivity and simplify assembly. Development of this new version began with a few wooden prototypes cnc milled by fellow RepRapper Derek at ArmyOfEvilRobots and has continued day in and day out ever since to bring you the public beta version of Tantillus. 100% opensource (files will be released the day the campaign ends under GPLv3). High speeds of 300mm/s + are possible. High resolution printing (X/Y step resolution of 8 micron per step,  Z step resolution of 0.4 micron per step) minimum X/Y radius limited by nozzle diameter, Z resolution limited by the properties of the plastic being used. What can it make? Most items available on Thingiverse fit on Tantillus' build platform. See more of my work and lots you can print at http://www.thingiverse.com/Sublime All of the items pictured were printed on Tantillus. Lion printed at 50 micron layer height, Makerbeams printed at 200 and 250 micron layer height. Table of various objects printed from 10 micron layers to 250 micron layers.

Find all the Tantillus Resources in one place: Tantillus.org. Want to read more about the early development? See my personal 3D printing blog Geometric Object Deposition Tool. Want to see more 3D printing action? Visit my youtube page and see Tantillus in action. Want to be part of development? Contribute to the RepRap Tantillus Wiki. Funding will go towards the first bulk order to bring you the lowest prices possible and towards further development, including: Belt upgrades for those of you that love belts. Daisychain expansion panel allowing multiple machines to run of a single set of electronics. Dual extrusion for Tantillus Plus and Expanded printable Tantillus. Proceeds from the printed parts go to members of the RepRap community to print the almost 1kg of plastic parts required to build each Tantillus. Hardware kit includes all bolts, nuts, washers, bearings, rods, tubing, springs and drive cables. (for a complete list please see http://www.tantillus.org/BOM.html note it is only the hardware listed not the printed parts or electronics in the hardware kit.) Acrylic kits include clear 6mm thick acrylic front, left, rear and right case panels, lower bed, upper bed, extruder spacer and 3mm thick Hotend groove mount plate. Pictured here http://www.tantillus.org/Images/Panels_01.gif . 2   -   J-head hotends. 0.5mm and 0.35mm (0.5mm recommended to start, 0.35mm is for experienced users with patience) Production will begin at the end of the campaign and continue until all parts have been delivered to the contributors. All printed parts will be produced by individual members of the RepRap community. The kits will be shipped in the order they are received. Be sure to order early if you want to be one of the first to take delivery. Shipping will begin as soon as stock arrives (estimated 30-45 days after campaign ends). Shipping charges will be calculated on an individual basis at the time of shipping at cost through Canada Post.
