I was helping a friend of mine with her new iPhone today. She finally gave in and bought one after watching me use mine on a daily (sometimes minute-by-minute) basis.

Like most new iPhone Users, she was constantly cleaning her screen after a few uses. (Note to friend: you'll get over that in a month or two)

I adjusted a few icons on her iPhone for her and returned the phone to her. She cleaned the screen again and locked it. A few seconds later, she received a SMS message and unlocked her phone. After logging into her phone she handed it to me and said that she had to use the "little girls' room" and would be right back - but would I please see why her iPhone wasn't retrieving her mail properly?

"Sure" I responded - but first I had to pour another cup of coffee. And wouldn't you know it - out of pure habit I locked her iPhone before I sat it down on her counter.

I picked up the phone with some coffee goodness on the table in front of me and swiped my finger across the screen to begin.

Oops! I'm prompted for a PIN number. Just as I was about to panic I realized that I could clearly see the smudges above each number on the PIN screen: 2, 5, 7 & 9. Gee, I wonder what her PIN could be?

A scramble pad would make this type of basic (yet time consuming) attack futile at best since the numbers would never be in the same place as the previous instance.

You can read all of SecurityMonkey's case files! Find them here. You can also read all of the 'Banana Cupboard' stories here. You may not get a lot done for a few hours... or even days.

Stories like this really makes me think that the iPhone is definitely not a business tool. I'll keep the Nokia 6110 with GPS, iPod nano, Eee PC and Acer 15.4" as my mobile office.The telcos could stop mobile phone theft overnight if they want - every phone has an IMEI that could be used to block a phone from network access. It should be a simple process:1. Phone stolen/lost2. Contact telco with IMEI3. IMEI posted to national block database used by all telcos.4. Phone becomes useless until original owner and telco remove from national database.It also shows how easy it is to access other people's data ;-)

Three bad PIN entries in a row in the EU -- be it bank card or cell phone -- and the code is no longer valid. In the case of a phone, a second number (PUK, supplied along with the SIM card and PIN) has to be entered. Screw that up three times in a row and that's the end of the SIM and the data on it. The phone's serial number is also normally flagged at the provider.

The reason they don't do that is because the customers will complain. Most of them are in a hurry when they go to unlock their phones and they don't want to be searching around trying to find where the numbers moved to while they are trying to access it.I'm surprised it didn't lock you out after 3 or so tries, that is were they should start when it comes to security, but then again too I have seen my daughters lock their phones and hand them to their children (toddlers at the time) just to keep them quiet. So I could see a lot of people getting upset about having to get it reset everytime they let their children play with it. Why they let them play with their phones I still don't understand, ever see what kids do to their toys?

indeed, here in france I would not have tried random PIN more than twice... blocking your friend's iPhone is not the best way to help...Anyway, the simpliest way to avoid these spy smudges, easier even than scramble pad, is to press all 10 numbers each time (your pin, then other numbers -even if not shown anymore on screen-).Never tried on an iPhone, but of course the pb would be if after typing PIN, other numbers would correspond to opening apps, calling... (well, in that case press numbers, then correct them... just less easy...)

Have none of you used a blackberry? 5 incorrect entries to unlock the phone and it's wiped. And to prevent the "lock the phone and hand it to a kid to play with" you have to type "blackberry" before typing the PIN after the 2nd failed entry (also makes sure your keyboard is working right). Scramble pads are bad UI, as was mentioned, and I don't see that happening on an apple product.

Craig,I think that may vary from provider to provider. My blackberry allows 10 attemps and doesn't require typing "blackberry" prior to the third attempt.But it does wipe the device after the 10th try, and with a much larger keyspace than the iPhone since the iPhone uses numbers only it's much more difficult to guess a PIN.

All in all - some custom security features that I think would make a nice wish list for any wannabe enterprise doohickie...(Don't shoot me if these exist on the iPhone - I'm still waiting for my T-Mobile contract to expire...)1. Configurable custom security settings.1a. Custom retry count (my company's BBs are set to 10 tries - I notice others mention fewer - i think that ambiguity is security initself... "Do I try a 3rd time or stop now?" *poof* "aww maaan!")1b. True forensic self wipe on failure. (After classes I've taken - I want that data G O N E.)1c. Configurable password complexity rules1d. i like the custom alphabet or scramble idea, but it isn't for the faint of heart. ;)2. To be mean - I'd like to see a self-destruct feature built in - like burn the worm circuit or something.3. Barring the self-destruct feature - autoenabling an email home with gps data would be a nice touch too.

Well all you would be doing is trading in one set of symbols (numbers) for another and confusing people at the same time.The scramble as a preference is a good idea. At least then people would have a choice and shouldn't be too hard to do.The best idea I have heard so far is the non-smudge, non-glare coating. Here I think the iphone (and I have managed to see one here in Turkey :) has gone for form over function.Over all when people have to touch something they are bound to leave traces. Even keypads (as you know) will show signs of wear if the same numbers are used and never changed.

Simian Quote, "What would be even cooler would be the use of symbols instead of letters/numbers. :-)"Oh Cheif, that's just crazy talking now! How would users be able to make their passwords be their kids' names!? Or their debit card's PIN ?!Just symbols... next thing you'll be wanting us all to refer to you as "The Primate formerly known as SecurityMonkey" and you'll start demanded all missives to be addressed to a drawing of a monkey mermaid..... (ala' Starbucks...)... wait.. MerMonk? No, that sounds creepy... MonkMaid? Gads.. even worse...~ tracy (Who's favorite user p/w after 2.5 years at this employ remains PecanPie!! Cracks me up everytime. 2 exclamations, now, not just 1! I like to say it with Jazz Hands.... She has long since changed it to one more dull, but the amusement lives on...)
