Nokia’s upcoming Lumia 900 Windows Phone could be the first smartphone running Microsoft’s mobile operating system to really make a splash in the United States. BGR exclusively reported that the new flagship 4G handset will hit AT&T store shelves late next month alongside a massive marketing blitz and a big subsidy program that will leave the phone with a surprisingly low $99.99 price tag. As impressive as the Lumia 900 is shaping up to be, however, Nokia is apparently working on another smartphone with new technology that will blow us all away. Read on for more.

In an interview with Finnish newspaper Kauppalehti, Nokia design boss Marko Ahtisaari said that the company is currently working on a revolutionary new smartphone that will make other handsets seem dated.

According to the Nokia executive, Apple’s user interface on the iPhone is “poorly designed” and convoluted. “The road from the kitchen into the dining room is always through the front door,” Ahtisaari told Kauppalehti. Meanwhile, operating systems like Symbian and Android are described by the design veteran as “dollhouses,” with furniture users can pick and rearrange.

Microsoft’s Windows Phone is more natural according to Ahtisaari, and the mysterious new smartphone Nokia is building will apparently push the mobile platform even further into the future.

The executive wouldn’t provide any firm details regarding the device, but he didn’t hesitate to set sky-high expectations. The phone will feature breakthrough technology that revolutionizes the user experience according to Ahtisaari, and owners will not have to bend down or even touch the screen in order to operate it.

Ahtisaari’s brief description of the technology suggests some type heads-up technology, or perhaps voice-driven controls similar to Apple’s virtual assistant Siri or Microsoft Kinect. We’re not sure how revolutionary voice controls would be be considering how widely voice command technology will be used this year, however. Nokia declined to comment.

UPDATE: A Nokia spokesperson contacted BGR with additional details regarding some of Ahtisaari’s comments. The interface elements he described during his interview are in fact concepts Ahtisaari has been discussing since December 2010, when he spoke about them on stage at LeWeb. The spokesperson declined to comment on if or when these concepts might appear in a production device.
