It is being reported by Chinese news services that a number of workers at manufacturer Wintek are suffering from n-hexane poisoning.

Wintek produces touchscreen displays for Apple’s iPhone and iPod touch devices. As part of that process the screens need to be cleaned, which usually involves alcohol as the cleaning agent. But the chemical n-hexane is also a well-known cleaning chemical used mainly in textile manufacturing, and it looks as though Wintek may have opted to use it.

It may be a good cleaner, but it’s quite bad for us humans. In small doses inhalation can lead to euphoria, headaches, and nausea. Long term, however, it is linked to nervous system failure, with early symptoms including cramps and tingling sensations in the arms and legs. Exposure on a daily basis would certainly increase the risk of such symptoms and eventual illness.

Reports of n-hexane use and poisoning at Wintek come from China Daily TV (Chinese-language video). It reported 49 Wintek employees received treatment in hospital from August last year for their symptoms. It also seems as if the response has only been to ask Wintek to stop using the chemical and change management.

At the moment this seems to be just accusations rather than concrete proof the chemical is being used. However, a couple of months before the employees entered hospital protests were held by the Taiwan Labor Organization over poor working conditions at Wintek. Further protests were also held in January this year.

This chemical is refined from crude oil and used in gasoline, glues, leather products, and roofing. So the risk of using it in a factory setting is not only the exposure for humans, but the high possibility of a fire breaking out and spreading very quickly if not handled correctly.

Choosing to use n-hexane instead of alcohol may be down to cost or availability. Maybe someone at Wintek managed to get a shipment of n-hexane very cheap and was using it to boost profit margins on what must be large orders coming from Apple. Alternatively, it could have been viewed as the better solution with the risks being overlooked or seen as minimal.

If the poisoning and poor working conditions turn out to be true we should expect Apple to take action. The company doesn’t want to be associated with such practices and Wintek may lose its contract. Otherwise guarantees need to be made that future production will follow more stringent rules and the employees effected receive ongoing care. No one wants to buy a gadget that potentially made a worker ill; and possibly for the rest of their lives.
