Anticipation for the launch of the Raspberry Pi $25 PC continues to grow as its launch window gets ever closer. Over the past few months it has been surprising to see what the tiny machine is capable of. Videos of it running Quake III, playing back 1080p video, and handling graphics-intensive particle and sprite demos have all impressed, but until now we haven’t really been able to gauge how the device compares to other gadgets.

Eben Upton has an interview going live today with Eurogamer’s Digital Foundry, and it offers up new insight into just how powerful the Raspberry Pi is. You may be surprised to find what it is actually better than in terms of performance.

The Raspberry Pi relies on a custom chipset from Broadcom called the BCM2835. Being custom, it has allowed the development team to tweak performance to the point where Eben believes it is the best mobile GPU available. That’s easy to say when you’ve worked on the chip, so he’s given some examples to show how well it performs. The GPU apparently doubles the performance currently found in the iPhone 4S. It is also expected to easily outperform Nvidia’s Tegra 2.

If you consider what an iPhone 4S is capable of, and all those devices running graphically intensive apps on the Tegra 2 platform, you can see the potential impact the Raspberry Pi could have.

The reason the Raspberry Pi exists is to get cheap computers into the hands of kids and available in every classroom. Get the younger generations programming and experimenting and you have an army of budding software and hardware engineers ready to build the next Google or Apple in years to come. But the computing power on offer in such a cheap package means Raspberry Pi could impact more than just kids and schools. The hardware is more than capable of being a HTPC, it could replace more expensive home PCs, and I’ve already suggested the $100 PC is now viable.

To classify the Raspberry Pi as a cheap PC for kids is to sell it very short. Just like Arduino opened up electronics to everyone, the $25 PC could become the heart of many a new product as well as redefining what we class as an affordable home computer.
