In my previous post, The Real Reason the U.S. Doesn’t Make iPhones: We Wouldn’t Want To, I argued that the current cost structure does not make any sense to assemble iPhones in America. I argued that we would be better off focusing on designing iPhones but letting the Chinese handle the assembly. The article has generated quite a few responses and heated debates. After some periods of soul searching, I have come to realize that I need to revise my original conclusion. So, I say yes, we canmake iPhones in America.

We can make iPhones in America, but not under today’s cost structure and technology. Lining up thousands of American workers in the 20 century style assembly line, doing repetitive work day in and day out, is not going to win manufacturing jobs back to America from developing nations. Making iPhones in America would require some great American creativity and productivity. This will become increasingly possible given the emerging new technology, especially the additive manufacturing which uses 3D printers turning layers of materials into solid objects.

3D printing technology is not new. It has long been used by combining other processes to manufacture circuit boards for electronics. The technology is now improving rapidly to be able to print a wide variety of objects, from simple tools and toys, to more complicated products such as airplane dashboards, replacement jawbones, bicycles, etc. Every year, millions of hearing aids are printed out in the U.S. The world’s first printed car rolled out of a printing press in 2011. Recently, an engineering professor, Behrokh Khoshnevis, at the University of Southern California (where I work), showcased a process he designed to build a house with a giant 3D printer. It was estimated that a house of 2500 square feet, with a full wiring and plumbing system, would be printed out, within 20 hours with fewer costs than traditional construction method.

This new manufacturing process is a transformative technology. It will completely transform conventional 20th century style of manufacturing process, which is based on a simple notion of increasing returns to scale which implies that increasing the size of a factory making the same type of products will improve production efficiency. This process was realized on Henry Ford’s production line for making cars. One hundred years after Ford’s initial assembly line, the same is true for Foxconn’s over 200,000 workers—who work on the same site making iPhones. In the conventional manufacturing process, the labor cost is a dominant factor. This is why iPhones are now being made by Foxconn in China, where labor cost is substantially lower than America.

3D printing technology overthrows the notion of a scale economy. Putting thousands of 3D printers in the same location will not improve cost competitiveness over scattering them in different places. Future manufacturing will be a very de-centralized process. 3D printers have become so cheap (personal 3D printers cost as low as less than $1000) that in the future, consumers can even produce their shoes, toys, kitchen wares at homes or a shop nearby. They can download the designs from the internet, tweak according to their tastes, and change the sizes for their own purposes. Future manufacturing no longer needs thousands of workers doing repetitive jobs in the same location.

The widespread use of 3D printing technology in manufacturing could lead to de-globalization of manufactured goods. In the past century, we have seen a globalization process in which companies allocate production sites in countries that make the most sense in terms of costs, far away from consumers. In this process, China and other developing nations have become the manufacturing hubs, producing products for consumer nations like the United States. The use of 3D printing technology will counter this globalization process, and could pull manufacturing away from China or other developing nations back to countries where products are consumed.

While manufacturing of goods could be localized with additive manufacturing, the professional services including engineering, design and intellectual protection will be globalized. This has a profound impact on redistribution of income among nations. America, leading in additive manufacturing technologies, will undoubtedly be the biggest winner in this process. American companies, not only can print “things” in local printing shops in America, but also in China for Chinese consumers using American designs. This could even reverse the trade balance between America and China.

However, those hoping this process will generate a large number of manufacturing jobs in America will be disappointed. The additive manufacturing will not bring back 20th century assembly jobs to America. What is needed more for America’s future is engineers, designers, and IP lawyers. Politicians arguing for solving unemployment problem by bringing back iPhone assembly jobs are looking in the mirror backward. They should be moving forward by focusing on policies to improve our education to produce talents for future manufacturing.

Maybe the day that America makes iPhones is not too far. They will be manufactured in local printing shops or at homes, instead of in assembly lines. Or, maybe when this day comes, these objects are no longer called iPhones. But one thing is for sure, America can make “things,” again!
