LAS VEGAS -- It's been nearly a year since the Apple fanboys first camped out to scoop up eBay-bound iPhones, and the biggest mobile players are still trying--and failing--to mount a serious challenge to its dominance of consumers' hearts and minds. While Apple was a trade show no-show for the annual wireless and telecom industry showcase here, I've been feeling their pulse pretty much everywhere while reporting live from the trenches at the Las Vegas Convention Center.

It's the trend that just won't die: Cellphone powerhouses are still forcing themselves to play catch-up to the new guy. In fact, it's become almost impossible to look at any of the major new handsets unveiled at CTIA or through our revolving gadget doors at Gizmodo without being reminded of the iPhone. While in some cases this is merely because Apple has cast such a long shadow, it's more often because other companies are intentionally mimicking the look and feel of Apple's year-old device. Unfortunately, this remained the case with CTIA's two biggest launches: the Samsung Instinct (coming soon to Sprint) and the LG Vu (which will join the iPhone on AT&T). Both touchscreen handsets bear an uncanny resemblance to the iPhone--only without its soul. While it's hard to complain when more than one person looks like a supermodel, the resemblance here is barely skin deep. I scored some face time with the new handsets, and, like previous iPhone-influenced devices, the charade ends quickly: Dig past the touchscreen, and the seamless, intuitive, well-thought-out design of the iPhone just isn't there. For example, the Instinct's browser pales in comparison to Apple's Safari, with so-so zooming and landscape-only orientation topping the list of gripes. And, unlike the iPhone, which makes touchscreen typing more palpable with fingerprint-size letter-zoom functionality, the Instinct forces you to press tiny characters. It was great to see both the Instinct and Vu enhancing those touchscreens with the increasingly popular haptic feedback buzz sensation , but this minor point of differentiation will likely disappear when Apple updates the iPhone in a couple of months. The Instinct, which is neither mind-blowing nor truly new (versions have existed in Korea), was probably the most prominent phone of the show--a fact that points to a larger trend (and one that spells trouble for handset manufacturers). When it comes to hardware, it's all quiet on the western front. Whether it's continued iPhone fallout, a recession-triggered fear of taking risks, or merely hard times for a maturing industry, the handset side is positively listless. The vast majority of phones on parade were either basic upgrades of well-known, well-worn models like the LG enV, or, even worse, were already shown at CES back in January or the Mobile World Congress a few weeks ago --an eternity in tech. And few of them really popped then. It's almost as if much of the mobile industry has completely given up, and their attempts at wowing customers have disintegrated into mere lip service. You get the feeling that it can't be long before other companies end up like Motorola, which has had such a hard time producing a lust-worthy follow-up to its formerly omnipresent RAZR that it's trying to abandon mobile phones entirely in order to focus on products like cable boxes. Mobile phones have only been must-have items for a few years now, and we shouldn't be seeing the big boys trying to cut their losses already. But we are. Maybe that's why CTIA's most exciting showings had little to do with cellphones and much to do with the next generation of high-speed networks. Like at CES , WiMAX, the next-gen high-speed network favored by Sprint, Intel and Motorola, was on display with live demos. Bringing it beyond the confines of the Las Vegas Convention Center, however, will be another matter, particularly given Sprint's current state of fiscal disrepair. Still, it was promising to see Motorola show some of the forward thinking that made it a once-dominant player, as it showed off boxes capable of handling both WiMAX and LTE (long-term evolution), a competing high-speed network backed by Verizon and AT&T in the United States, plus many more companies internationally. In the end, one thing was clear: This year's CTIA failed to produce an iPhone killer, or even a real iPhone competitor--a fate that will, in all likelihood, be repeated at the next mobile trade show. Still, we're inching closer to the dream handsets that were once relegated to our imaginations, and expanding faster than ever toward high-speed networks that should make desktop-like browsing possible--and toward a form of mobile TV that's finally beginning to live up to its promise. So while it's painful to watch once-great companies struggle, the same truth applies to all cellphone manufacturers (even Apple, who still hasn't give us a 3G-capable iPhone): better late than never.
