BASF has been researching into metal-organic frameworks (MOFs), and the processes that can be used to manufacture these highly efficient storage materials for gases on an industrial scale, for more than ten years. In September, BASF was awarded the Pierre Potier Prize in the field of process innovation for its successful research. This prize is awarded for outstanding examples of sustainable innovations in the field of chemistry by the two French chemical associations Fédération Française pour les sciences de la Chimie (FFC) and l’Union des Industries Chimiques (UIC) in honour of the chemist and pharmacist Pierre Potier.

We spoke with Dr. Manuela Gaab, one of the chemists in the MOF research team at BASF, in order to learn more about the potential of MOFs, their applications and the innovative new manufacturing process.

Why is this new manufacturing process so innovative and sustainable? This novel process enables us to produce aluminium MOFs on an industrial scale for the first time. We can now produce batches of several tons, and they can be used commercially in applications such as storage tanks for natural gas. Another important advantage is that this innovative process no longer employs any organic solvents, only water. This makes it safe and environmentally friendly. These MOFs are very easy to produce, so easy that advanced school students can make them in our school laboratory.

Why are MOFs so special? The special feature of MOFs is that their crystalline nanostructures enable them to be used to store natural gas and other fuel gases such as hydrogen. MOFs consist of a three-dimensional metal-organic framework with pore sizes in the nanometer range. Their high porosity and their large internal surface area allow them to be used to store large quantities of gas.The huge surface area of these crystals is illustrated very well by MOF-210, which was developed by Professor Yaghi (University of California, Berkeley). These zinc carboxylate crystals have a surface area of more than 10 000 m2 per gram. This corresponds to three football pitches within a material quantity that correlates to a sugar cube! Their enormous surface area enables metal-organic frameworks to be used to store large quantities of gas, just like water in a sponge.

What are the applications for MOFs? Mobility is an interesting area of application for MOFs. At BASF, we are researching into alternative power concepts for the future that are environmentally friendly and conserve resources as well as being comfortable. We are investigating several different concepts aimed at improving the performance of vehicles powered by electricity and natural gas. MOFs can make a decisive contribution to the performance of vehicles powered by natural gas. Up until now, very few vehicles powered by natural gas have been approved for use on the roads, even though they represent an environmentally friendly alternative mode of transport. One of the main reasons for this is their low fuel storage capacity, which causes the bulky gas tanks and bottles to take up lots of room, and their limited range. They have to be fitted with an extra tank, and some of the luggage space is used to accommodate large gas bottles. MOFs can play an important role here, because their special properties can be used to obtain a large increase in fuel storage capacity.

How can MOFs be used to increase the storage capacity of tanks for natural gas? Gas molecules can be stored at a higher density on the surfaces of MOFs than in conventional tanks. This enables more gas to be stored in tanks with the same volume at the same pressure. Larger quantities of gas in the tank increase the range of vehicles and, in future, cars powered by natural gas will be able to travel twice as far on one tank of gas.

What other possible applications are there for MOFs? Separating and purifying gases are examples of industrial applications for MOFs. These applications make use of the different pore sizes of MOFs and differences in the affinity of gases for different materials. Another industrial application is catalysis, and we are also currently exploring other applications such as fuel cells for automobiles. MOFs could be used to store hydrogen fuel in the same way as the natural gas that is used to power vehicles. These are only a few examples of the versatile range of applications for MOFs and their future potential. We are in a position to supply customized MOFs in order to meet the specific demands of different customers, and new classes of MOF will also gradually find their way onto the market.
