Click to view quoted imageClick to view quoted imageClick to view quoted imageClick to view quoted imageClick to view quoted image If you're unsure or back and forth whether the Surface or iPad is best for you, please consider this story. Yesterday morning, I got up to go to work. I walked outside and noticed the trashcan at the end of the driveway (trash went out the night before). I set my surface on the roof of my car and walked over to grab the trashcan and take it back to the house. I then proceeded to get in my car and started driving down the street. Made my first left at another street and drove down until I got to RT 1. Made my right hand turn in the middle of 60mph traffic and apparently I had forgotten my Surface is on my roof! (well, WAS on my roof) it had flown off and laid in the middle of the road. I didn't notice my Surface was not sitting next to me for another half mile when I made a very quick U-turn! Driving back the direction I came from with tears in my eyes, I was scanning the roads looking for my tablet. I get down to where I made my turn onto RT 1 and see it laying in the road. I stop (luckily nobody was behind me) and watched the last group of traffic drove by. Each car passed by with the tires on each side of the Surface until the very last car. The tire of the car ran completely over the Surface and next thing I saw was my brand new $700 tablet and touch cover flying through the air in separate directions! My heart jumped, and so did I! I jumped out of my car and ran across the street to first grab the tablet, then the Surface, and then my phone which of course fell out of my lap during all this. I jumped back in my car just before 60 mph traffic made its way to me! I drove home, not even looking at the tablet until I pulled into the driveway. I put my car in park and pick up the Surface. First thing I see is the backside of it. Some scratches and corners beat up quite a bit. I flipped it over and to my surprise, there is not a single scratch nor crack in the screen! I was completely speechless! The moment of truth was coming up.. I hit the power button, and never was I so happy to see the start screen of the Surface! It had survived! I was expecting to see glass everywhere and components laying in the street, but Microsoft did me better than that! This product is insane! I would love to see what an iPad looks like after getting run over by a car going 60 mph! The Surface feels completely sturdy, exactly like how I got it. Everything works in it, even the touch cover (which got a slight tear in it) works completely fine! Microsoft has made such an incredible product, I am completely speechless how this could happen! I am such a grateful surface owner! I took some pics so everybody can see how well this held up! I'm even creating this thread and downloading the pics from my camera using my Surface!Good job MS and lucky you! Feel bad for the mishap though. I can imagine the look on your face when the car went over it :O
