Internet tycoon Kim Dotcom says his new file sharing site could be what is needed to "reboot" plans to connect New Zealand to the United States through an undersea fibre cable.

Pacific Fibre, the company that hoped to build New Zealand's second international internet link by 2014, was forced to can the ambitious project in August as it failed to raise enough money.

Dotcom today invited Pacific Fibre chairman Sam Morgan and co-founder and director Rod Drury to discuss his plans. 

Dotcom tweeted: "@samfromwgtn @roddrury Let's #swimatkims next week and talk about Pacific Fibre." 

To which, Drury responded: "@KimDotcom if there's a photo we need to push @samfromwgtn down the end of the pool. He's a whippet #swimatkims."

But he earlier tweeted: "While I admire the @KimDotcom #megacable plan, there is a tiny flaw. US permission required to connect to USA."

Dotcom told media his new file sharing website Me.ga could help fund the multi-million dollar project.

'Free broadband'

Dotcom is also proposing free broadband for all New Zealanders. He told ONE News once the cable is installed it is "relatively cheap to maintain".

"We would provide all NZ ISP's with free access to the cable for individual customers (citizens) and charge a fee to business and government customers.

"Because ISP's control the last mile and provide equipment like routers they would still charge a fee but it could be as low as 15% - 20% of current bandwidth plans with three to five times faster connection speeds and without transfer limits."

Dotcom said that "one way or another New Zealand needs Pacific Fibre".

"I think it is important to reboot efforts to make it happen," he tweeted. 

The German National said unfortunately the Government wants to invest in roads.

"In 10-15 years more people will work and shop from home. You don't need Tarmac you need fibre."

Pacific Fibre chairman Morgan said in August that he was "terribly disappointed" the company's plan to build a high speed fibre-optic cable connecting New Zealand and Australia to California had to be dropped. 

Morgan said at the time that despite getting good investor support, the company, which was launched in March 2010, was not able to reach the $400 million needed to fund the building of the 13,000km cable.

Dotcom has received support from his followers on Twitter, with one saying he would put in everything he could in to the plan, as it is an essential piece of infrastructure.

And Telecom Users Association chief executive Paul Brislen tweeted: "@KimDotcom we'd looked at starting up a public fund/trust to raise cash. There's enough demand out there."

The cable would double New Zealand's bandwidth. 