THE world's worst child abuse websites will be blocked by internet providers under a new plan that will see federal Labor formally dump its pledge to introduce a mandatory online filter for all computers.

Communications Minister Stephen Conroy will today announce new moves to require Australia's internet providers to block already illegal child abuse websites on Interpol's "worst of" list.

"Blocking the Interpol 'worst of' list will help keep children safe from abuse, it meets community expectations, and fulfils the Government's commitment to preventing Australian internet users from accessing child abuse material online," he said.

"Given this ... the Government has no need to proceed with mandatory filtering."

The controversial filter was one of Labor's 2007 election promises but opponents said it would block far more than offensive websites and was internet censorship.


Others feared it would slow internet speeds and cause congestion. In some trials it blocked legitimate websites, and the filter has been put on hold by the Government for the past year.

But some family and religious groups such as the Australian Christian Lobby said the filter was vitally needed to protect children from the dangers of sexually explicit content.

After various trials and delays, Senator Conroy will today announce his compromise covering only the worst child abuse sites and, unlike the proposed filter, not pornography or information on drugs or committing crimes.

Some internet providers have already been voluntarily blocking sites for 12 months.

"They (say) this has had no impact on internet speeds or congestion and they have had no reports of people being denied access to legitimate web content," Senator Conroy said.

He said there was never a place for child sexual abuse material in our society, with widespread community support for blocking access.

Senator Conroy praised the major internet companies and the Internet Industry Association for taking steps to meet their lawful obligations. He said more than 90 per cent of Australians using the internet would have child abuse material blocked.

He said people who tried to visit a banned site would be advised it had been blocked. Federal Police will soon tell smaller internet providers to block the sites.
