Mobile Phones are evolving fast, the abundance in feature rich handset models leaves choosing the best mobile phone difficult task.

A valuable mobile phone is a blend of advanced specifications & features, durable battery life, attractive design, eye catchy exterior and a reasonable price.

The escalating demands and growing consumer taste is heating up the market competition. It would not be surprising to know android phones dominating the list while HTC, Samsung and Apple competing for the glory.

Samsung Galaxy S 3 is probably the best and most highly rated smartphone in the world today. The Korean Giant Samsung has showcased innovation by launching this advanced feature equipped device that tops our charts.

Probably the pick of the year from HTC Phones, this handset offers almost all the latest features but still lags behind Samsung Galaxy S 3 when it comes to elegance and style.

iPhone is not only a smartphone its a craze. iPhone 4S is perhaps the most successful model out of the bunch. Despite shattering the hopes of all those crazy fans expecting iPhone 5 last year, Apple has managed to taste the flavor of success through the sharp, exciting features, attractive design and improved iOS 5 with many useful free Apps.

The sleek and stylish Sony Xperia S bags some advanced quality features with dashingly attractive looks.

“Samsung Galaxy S 2″ the awesome smartphone with advanced features that topped our charts last year but this time around secures fifth rank in the list of best phones for 2012.

The signature smartphone HTC One S offers great functionality to its users. 1.5 Ghz processor, 1 GB RAM, 8MP Camera and Android 4.0 makes it worth buying.

Samsung Galaxy Nexus has some sharp features and user friendliness, making it one of the leaders among other lucrative Mobile Phones available in the market.

The only device in the list that runs on Windows Phone 7.5 Mango OS, Nokia Lumia 900 stands out from similar mobile phones courtesy sharp features such as 1GHZ Scorpion Processor and 8MP Camera.

Sony Xperia Ray is another stylish Android Phone under the belt of reputed “Sony” Brand Name. It has some amazingly cool looks & loaded with attractive specifications providing users some of the advanced features.

With some amazing features, the smartphone Motorola Droid Razr Max is one of the top mobile phones to buy in 2012.

Hey did I miss out mentioning any of the deserving mobile phones or wanna leave your feedback, don’t hesitate to drop in your comments below.
