Complaining about your email inbox is like complaining about winter  in New York, we all experience it and it can suck. I remember when Gmail first launched and how powerful it was with features such as the ability to search through all of your mail.  It was so fast compared to AOL mail and it made email enjoyable for a while…  Although Gmail continues to serve as my favorite mail client, especially with the full package of Google goodies, including Calendar and Drive, however, for all of its benefits, it has not adapted well for the onslaught on email communication that exists today.  I try to keep my inbox as close to zero as possible (rarely happens, but I do keep it under 50 so it fits in one page) and so as my inbox has grown, I have sought out tools to combat the increase in email, which are explained below.

Boomerang was the first Gmail plugin that I found helpful in managing my inbox.  It comes with a 30 day professional trial and if you don’t feel like paying, there is a free version that allows you to boomerang 10 messages a month.

Pros: Easy to install and figure out, works great, helpful in clearing your inbox and setting reminders Cons: Only 10 messages per month for free version, paid version is pricey for an individual ($60/year), works slowly sometimes

Overall, I have been impressed with the service.  It’s easy to use and I really like the ability to set reminders on emails sent where I want to make sure I hear back from individual messaged. Also, Boomerang has released a plugin for Outlook and now has a new Boomerang calendar app that I have just installed and looks promising.  Good instructional videos on the site explain how to use all of Boomerang’s services.

ActiveInbox was another company that I discovered later that has built a robust offering for Gmail.  Similar to Boomerang, ActiveInbox integrates with Gmail.  While it doesn’t have the send later feature, it does have everything else Boomerang offers and more.    ActiveInbox offers free and paid licenses, with a 15 day trial for the premium version.   The paid version is $25/year and ActiveInbox allows each license to be used with a business and personal account (would need two accounts with Boomerang).

Pros: Easy to install, low subscription price, ton of functionality Cons: Slows down Gmail sometimes, some functionality not intuitive

Overall, I really like some of the functionality such as the “send and archive” button, which saves me a bunch of clicks, however, some of the functionality is superfluous (not sure why I need projects when they are just labels).  It is a much cheaper price than Boomerang,  however, the simplicity offered by Boomerang makes it a toss-up of which one to choose.  I would probably pick Boomerang for my personal account and ActiveInbox for an organization, since you can track projects easier with its offerings.

MailPilot, a kickstarter funded company, started with a simple premise, “email is broken.”  While most email clients designate an email as read when it is viewed, MailPilot assumes that emails are tasks and that they are not completed until acted upon.  MailPilot has created a separate platform that allows users to quickly and efficiently review and respond to emails to help reduce clutter.  They are currently in Beta and only offer a paid version for $60/year (however, your annual subscription does not start until they come out of Beta).

Pros: Easy to install, intuitive functionality, simple and elegant design Cons: Platform moves slow (should become faster as product developed), separate email client than Gmail, pricier

Overall, I like how the founders have reimagined email and the solution they have presented, however, there is a major flaw in their thinking that has not been adequately addressed, which is I don’t just use Gmail for email, but also for its other integrated services (calendar, tasks, contacts, chats, videos, etc).  I have been using MailPilot since its debut, but I have a hard time  completely separating myself from Gmail and find myself wanting to go back to it.   However, I do believe that for those focused on email and crushed by the weight of emails received, this is a good tool for quickly getting through them.

Another great tool for dealing with email clutter is Unroll me.  Unroll me collects all of your newsletters/subscriptions and sends them to you in one email daily.  This allows me to scan through a bunch of emails faster that typically don’t need to be opened individually and are usually just archived.  They also have a powerful unsubscribe feature that allows you in one click to unsubscribe from any mailing list.
