Yesterday, RIM (maker of Blackberry smartphones) announced that their new BB10 operating system will launch on January 10, 2013.   In smartphone years, that’s so far away we can’t imagine how it would be received, but it is quite possible that the launch might be a sort of comeback for the embattled device.  Allow us to recap BB’s woes, just in case you spent the last 2 years on the International Space Station.

Up until about two years ago, Blackberries dominated the smartphone market for all the reasons we know: convenience, top down control of employee access to apps, FBI-grade security and of course the amazing physical key pad that BB users still can’t stop raving about.  Back then, most users were corporate types and a good number of them were workaholics.  But then the winds of change blew in phones that did cool things and allowed more freedom because they weren’t issued by the man.  Several years went by with Android and iPhone users showing their BB counterparts all the cool stuff they were allowed to do on their devices.  Then companies started “bring your own device” policies that opened the smartphone flood gates. People’s toddlers started getting smartphones for Christmas.  The result: Two years later, Blackberry devices haven’t been hip since the economy was booming. That feels like such a long time ago that it’s pretty uncool to tote RIM’s little black boxes around.  As prolific developers of smartphone apps, we haven’t had a paying client ask us to make a BB app now for months!).

While the above story might sound like the end of the end for what was once a great institution, there are rumblings of hope that make Blackberry not quite down for the count, yet.  While still far from a safe bet, here are three reasons why us developers are keeping a keen eye on the BB operating system:

Despite their bad couple of years, RIM still has deep pockets.  Deep pockets mean serious PR and Blackberry 10 is RIM’s only hope to recapture some of the 80% of market share it lost since 2008. The new phones on this system will feature Flow View and other technology terms that would looks great in a techy op ed.  According to first-hand accounts, the user experience will be fun and even amazing in places. At the developer level (where Certatim operates) there is a little bit of a BB 10 buzz as RIM hosts a series of “hackathons” that they hope will rekindle technical interest in the devices. Given that RIM can’t afford for BB10 not to work, some observers are expecting the market response in 2013 to reflect the overwhelming positivity that happens when the PR people get behind something.  Markets seem to think so as 30% of RIM’s stock value has come back in recent months. Yet only time can tell…

One of the things that makes Blackberry attractive to some smartphone buyers today is the price. Price is a factor in the US and EU markets where only 5% of smartphone users still tote the devices, but can be the factor in developing countries.  BRIC, Brazil/Russia/India/China, market penetration for BB is at an all-time high even as North American market share continues to disappear.  Here in Miami, we do a lot of work around localizing mobile apps and websites for Latin America.  While Apple might have 16% of the smartphone market in the US, they are only at 6% in Brazil with BB just behind it at 4.2%.  Considering that only some 2.5% of Brazilian users had BB’s in 2011 that’s a 60% increase in one year.  Will this trend continue? Quite possibly. If it does, we can expect to see some increase in app requests for the BB10 system.

Not changing to suit the market was a misstep.  Creating the Playbook was ill-advised and delaying BB10 for nearly two years is probably unprecedented in its unfortunateness.  Despite these struggles, there exists a solid core of die-hard fans of the devices – mostly those who see it as a head-down-get-stuff-done laptop-in-the-hand. Additionally, the device remains the only smartphone permissible by US security agencies because of its unparalleled ability to encrypt.  It’s standard issue for train platform staff in parts of the UK and in Bangalore, India they’re used by traffic cops.  So while upgrading your latest game or foodie app might not appeal to Special Agents, middle aged sales people and Indian meter maids, productivity software at the enterprise level just might.  Could this mean a future of operational/productivity app creation on BB10? Maybe. Who knows?  Here at Certatim we’re leaving the door open just in case.

Looking for someone to develop blackberry apps ?  Give us a shout at Certatim. You will be impressed..
