More and more governments around the world are either asking Google to remove content - or tell them who its users are.

Google's transparency report is the guide to how the governments of the world are interacting with the web giant in 2012. And it's an alarming picture.

The report covers two types of requests:

The is is how those numbers break down.

The latest report, which covers up to the end of the second quarter of this year shows that in the first half of 2012, there were 20,938 inquiries from governments around the world. Those requests were for information about 34,614 accounts - these are users' accounts.

The number of government requests to remove content from Google's services was largely flat from 2009 to 2011. But the latest data shows a huge spike: in the first half of 2012, there were 1,789 requests from government officials around the world to remove 17,746 pieces of content.

For the first time, the governments of Azerbaijan, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Hungary, Monaco, Mauritius, Philippines, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, Trinidad and Tobago and South Africa requested the removal of content from Google.

Google has also been inaccessible to the population of Iran and China since 2009, although it did receive a request from a Chinese provincial land bureau to remove a search result for linking to a site that allegedly defamed a government official, which it turned down.

In the UK, those content removals were up by a staggering 98% and included a request from what must be a local police force for "linking to sites that criticise the police and claim individuals were involved in obscuring crimes". Google turned those requests down. They also received a request from a different police force to take down a YouTube video for "criticising the agency of racism". They turned that down too.

This is how UK requests look - dominated by the UK's Office of Fair Trading requesting the removal of 93,360 fraudulent Google Adwords linked to scams over the period.

In the US it looks a little different:

Content removal requests are up by 46% in the US. Google received five requests and one court order to remove seven YouTube videos for criticising local and state government agencies, law enforcement or public officials. It didn't do this.

It also received a court order to

The full data is below for you to download. What can you do with it?

• Facts are Sacred: the power of data (on Kindle)

Data journalism and data visualisations from the Guardian

• Search the world's government data with our gateway

• Search the world's global development data with our gateway

• Flickr Please post your visualisations and mash-ups on our Flickr group• Contact us at data@guardian.co.uk

• Get the A-Z of data• More at the Datastore directory• Follow us on Twitter• Like us on Facebook
