The new app makes job recruiting on the social network more high profile, something that should worry LinkedIn.

Facebook today launched a job-board application, featuring 1.7 million listings from five different recruiting organizations.

The new application, a product of theSocial Jobs Partnership that Facebook started last year with several public agencies, aggregates jobs that are already available through the separate organizations to give job seekers a central location to look for work.

This initial slew of jobs -- sorted by industry, location, and skills -- comes from BranchOut, DirectEmployers Association, Work4Labs, Jobvite, and Monster.com.

"Today's launch of the Social Jobs Application highlights what we've known all along -- that both recruiters and job seekers benefit when jobs are posted where candidates spend their time, and research overwhelmingly tells us that this is on Facebook," Stephane Le Viet, CEO of Work4Labs, said in a press release. "Undoubtedly, there will be an acceleration of the shift to social media as the primary channel to find a job with the extraordinary push of this consortium. We are fully committed to making the Social Jobs Application on Facebook the best possible resource for connecting candidates and companies."

Facebook is not making any money directly off this application, so this doesn't mean the company is getting into the jobs listing business just yet. Still, LinkedIn must be worried. The new app, and the partnership arrangement, highlights how much Facebook is at the core of social jobs recruiting -- LinkedIn's bread and butter.

Facebook's 1 billion users is what's attractive about recruiting on the network, recruiters said. Work4 Labs said it's posted 2.2 million jobs to Facebook in the last 18 months because that's where potential employees are. Fifty percent of employers use Facebook in their hiring process, according to a Social Jobs Partnership survey.

The survey's top tip for job seekers? While most job candidates may think that using Facebook to network is the only way to get a job via Facebook, 87 percent of recruiters said the No. 1 way to get on a company's radar is to "Like" your desired company's page.
