Managers surveilling their workers is nothing new, but recent technology is encouraging an unprecedented intrusion into employees’ privacy and control of their work. Mobile devices in particular are giving employers the ability to monitor a worker’s every movement.

This is the stuff Henry Ford and Frederick Winslow Taylor dreamt about.

Here’s a system Hyatt recently rolled out at their Andaz West Hollywood Hotel. Every housekeeper has to carry around an iPod touch, all of which are linked to monitoring computers in the manager’s office. The boss can observe the movements of every housekeeper in the hotel without having to leave their desk. 

Housekeepers have to track their productivity on the devices. They hit a “Start” button when they enter a room and an “End” button when they finish. If they aren’t working fast enough, managers see it in real time from a central location and offer up warnings through the Ipod.

When a housekeeper finishes a room the system automatically assigns their next room. The problem is that the system doesn’t account for where the housekeeper is in the hotel, so rooms are often assigned on the opposite side of the hotel, requiring workers to move heavy carts and equipment over long distances. Cathy Youngblood, a housekeeper at the hotel, remarked that “Whoever designed this system has not done hotel housekeeping…They may be a business major, and they may be a very good business major, but they have not done hotel housekeeping at Hyatt Andaz.”

It gets worse. Hyatt designed the system so that housekeepers are represented on the screenby a cartoon dog.I’m sure Hyatt claims this was meant to be cute, but it’s obvious to anyone with a wage-job why being depicted as a dog would be highly offensive. If they weren’t being intentionally malicious, Hyatt’s obliviousness shows how little consideration they give their employees.

Fortunately, workers at the Hyatt Andaz West Hollywood are unionized with UNITE HERE. They’re pursuing an NLRB lawsuit because the hotel violated their union contract in implementing the system. But there’s nothing protecting non-union hotel workers from this degrading invasion of privacy.

Everyone in the service industry knows the customer is a second boss. Customers watch you more closely than your real boss, and a simple customer complaint can result in being disciplined or fired. Plus, for food and beverage workers the customer dictates the majority of your pay through tips.

There’s a new type of employee-rating app that gives customers even more control over workers.

One is theTip Card. It allows customers to rate individual servers, just as they now rate overall restaurants on sites like Yelp. Customers find out the server’s name, add them to the Tip Card database, then type in their pros and cons along with an explanation of why the customer did or didn’t leave a large tip. 

The app gives already entitled restaurant customers an even more disgusting amount of power over workers. It also gives the real boss more authority because the Tip Card’s database is available to anyone with the app, so restaurant managers can easily use it to monitor servers. Every customer becomes a security camera.

Going a step beyond the Tip Card is the Waiter Rater. It does everything Tip Card does, but it allows customers to give servers passive-aggressive feedback in real time. Take a look at the screen shot above: the idea is that customers leave their iPhone on the corner of their table and regularly adjust their server’s tip percentage based on how well the meal is going.

Service workers often have yet a third boss: their co-workers. Co-workers can be your best friends and your partners in creating a better workplace, but your boss can turn them into competitors who monitor you and push you to work harder. 

New employee ranking technologies take this divide-and-conquer strategy to a new level.

Consider one suchsystem used in Disneyland’s hotels in Anaheim.

In the basement of most hotels there’s the laundry room where workers are hurriedly throwing towels, sheets, pillowcases, etc. into industrial washers and dryers and then folding them before sending them upstairs to be placed in rooms. It’s hot, loud, crowded and busy.

Into this harsh work environment Disneyland has added huge screens hanging down throughout the room displaying an ever-changing scoreboard listing each employee’s name and productivity level. A program continuously measures each worker’s productivity and compares it against an expected productivity, creating a percentage used to rank the worker against all the other workers in the room. Workers refer to the system as the “electronic whip.”

Not Your Average Joe’s restaurants haveimplemented a similar system that ranks servers based on sales and tips. The rankings are publicly displayed, so all workers and bosses know where everyone stands. The highest ranking servers are allowed to select their shifts first and obtain other privileges, while the lowest-ranking servers select shifts last and, presumably, face discipline and termination if they stay at the bottom too long.

These systems directly give bosses more power by providing a real-time tally of worker performance and obedience. But they also force workers into constant competition as everyone strives for the top ranking and the privileges association with it. The result is an accelerated race to the bottom where already overworked and underpaid service employees drive one another to labor more for less.
