You’ve weighed the pros and cons, crunched the numbers, and started pulling names for a vendor comparison. This is the year you’ll be taking your company’s email operations into the cloud ...and congratulations are in order! Don’t worry, you’re not alone. Many companies are finding the total cost of the ownership model to be compelling.  While hosting email, on premise, is the logical choice in certain scenarios, the maturation of the cloud is quickly eliminating many of the barriers.  On the other hand, if you are still using Lotus Notes you might want to rethink your strategy.  

Wait are you still using Notes? 

No worries we’ll work through that too.

In March of last year tech analyst Forrester noted, “Cloud-based email and collaboration can be more cost effective, increase your flexibility, and help control the historical business and technical challenges of deploying these tools yourself.” And, in an April 2011 article, “To Cloud or Not to Cloud?”, the Wall Street Journal’s Robert Plant underscored the wisdom of companies starting a shift into the cloud with standalone systems like email and payroll. “On the whole, it may be a better idea to move relatively mature and nonessential systems, like email and payroll, to the cloud first,” Plant advises. “Taking this step frees up some of a company’s attention and resources, so it can focus on improving the business. And its tech team has a chance to get familiar with the cloud in a lower risk environment.”

Making this strategic shift comes with some significant payoffs. With proper planning, for example, you should be able to cut – or at least freeze – your company’s email-related costs. You’re likely to free your IT staff, allowing them to focus on your company s core business objectives. And by leveraging hosted technology and the Cloud, you’re making it easier and more cost-effective to scale the number of mailboxes and storage you need as you grow.

As you dive into this project, you’ll have a long list of questions you need to answer. What’s the best way to handle security? Do you have – or need – multiple encryption requirements? What do your lawyers say about email, the Cloud, and regulatory compliance? How, exactly, will you meet the standards of your organization’s privacy policy enforcement? What about deep content scanning? Data loss prevention? High volume outbound mail? Perhaps more to the point, as you move to realize your team s decision to take your email into the Cloud, what will you do to maintain your momentum?

If you’re looking for answers, this free paper, “Migrating Your Email to the Cloud: Maximizing the Off-Premise Promise” offers an approach to kicking off this process and identifies a few critical areas that will require some thought ranging from identifying the optimal provider to addressing the real-world demands of your end users. Download this paper, and let’s get started. 
