Take a look at a few web-based and mobile applications. Applications like FourSquare, Airbnb and Labortopia connect their users with people within the same community and other small businesses, restaurants, freelancers, etc. In return, these applications encourage exploring and discovery, and welcomes  users to visit other communities.  To reference a particular personal experience, I recall  using Foursquare for a number of weeks. After accumulating hundreds of check-ins, I slowly started to realize how Foursquare brought my daily and otherwise normal, routine to light. I witnessed first hand how some aspects of life can become repetitive  or even, dare I say, mundane. In contrast, these platforms have figured out ways to reward you for using their services. This  "risk and reward" type approach stimulates their customers emotions by rewarding their efforts. This delivers a fresh, new way to experience life and explore without fear or constraint. Prior,  people had to explore their communities on their own and risk greatly impacted decision making. Whether it had been by walking, biking, or riding a car around town until finally spotting a restaurant, auto repair shop, local laundry, etc. The means of discovering these small businesses hasn't changed, but rather,  the method of discovering this new business or service. However, some companies are still deploying old marketing tactics, such as mail marketing and TV ads to bring you to their business, but the best and most effective way of marketing remains,  as most of us know, word of mouth.

Startup corporations like Groupon, Facebook, and Labortopia have deployed social marketing or, inbound marketing, to find new customers and   aid existing customers in the discovery/connection of small businesses and people who provide their own services.

Most of the time, we ask our close friends and family to provide us with such information and we trust their judgement, but slowly these applications are changing the way we go about obtaining information from our social network and friends. As mentioned, The application ecosystem hasn't completely changed the way we discover or explore a new restaurant, but has added a new layer from the experienced.  

Foursquare, Yelp, Google, and Apple have captured and continue to capture,  an abundance of data  from their users to analyze and search for certain patterns that would further help developers improve customer experience. This aided the introduction and appeal of the first iphone, which was then followed by Google's Android platform. These titans are responsible for the majority of the growth in the smartphone market. And they continue to contribute to this growing market, which has reached 1.038 billions units worldwide and  continues to grow at a rapid rate yearly.  

Entrepreneurs are capturing and using this information to recreate or, re-package, an age old idea: deliver simple experience. At the moment, services like Yelp, Uber, Airbnb, and other competing startups, are all disrupting old services like the yellow pages and restaurant review magazines (yeah, they exist)  by reintroducing the services that were once absent of technological intervention . We   witness it already happening with Amazon and Apple. Both have disrupted the standard of how books were sold and distributed. They have designed a compelling business model to sell books for a cheaper price and deliver this  content via iPads or the Amazon hd tablets and kindles.

Other startups are slowly disrupting other markets and outdated business models, by use of technologies already in the creation process by entrepreneurs. A handful of startups are creating interesting new markets like TaskRabbit and Airbnb. Other startups are creating similar ideas or entering the market  in a slightly different manner than their competitors. This ripple effect, if you will, hasn't completely disrupted every market segment yet, but as technology keeps improving, smartphone access will become even more available to those around the world. Over time, we will experience a complete shift in technology.
