At Telstra, we have thousands of people who live and work in regional Australia. For many of them, their job is to make a genuine contribution to the communities in which they live by helping people connect wherever they may be.

This was brought home to me when we recently reached a milestone of activating our 7,700th mobile site which tipped our coverage footprint over 2.3million sq km of the Australian land mass (additionally we cover approx 1 million sq km to sea but that is another story). By any measure, on any network in the world, covering this area and more than 99% of the population with 3G wireless broadband (and now building out our 4G networks) is a huge undertaking.

To put this in perspective, we now have Telstra mobile network coverage across our continent that is more than the combined landmasses of France, Thailand, Malaysia, the Philippines, Italy, Greece and Ireland.

This extent of coverage with 7,700 bases station towers seems impossible when you consider some of the larger nations have less coverage with tens of thousands of bases. There are a number of reasons for this. Firstly the superior 850 MHz frequency we use allows the signal to travel further from each site and secondly the ingenuity of our engineers has tailored coverage for Australian conditions and distances. We are one of the few operators in the world with mountain top towers capable of up to 200km of cell range using special cell extension software. For even better reception we also use locally optimised power amplifiers and low noise receivers to extract the last bit of signal when combined with phones rated with our customer friendly ‘Blue Tick’.

Thinking of all this gives me a sense of pride in our engineering team however, we are just part of the equation. What is just as inspiring is the number of Telstra people who live and work across our vast country and who everyday drive great distances and stay away from home for long periods of time to roll out our networks, connect our customers and resolve any concerns they might have.

To recognise the milestone of 2.3 m sq km of Next G® network coverage, we asked the folk on the ground to send us a photo of themselves showing where the Telstra mobile network operated – no matter how far flung they were. The response was overwhelming with hundreds of photos being sent in from Riverton, Sabai Island, Willalooka, Bogan Shire, Kariong, Gunning – you name the town. I invite you to watch a collation we pulled together of Telstra people, standing in front of their town name (where there is a town sign) and I sincerely apologise to those whose image we can’t show here.

I want to thank all our staff who work to keep Australia connected.
