Hello from Advertising Week! You may remember a couple months ago at another industry event across the pond I shared how we were bringing in creative agency partners earlier than ever before to co-ideate on potential advertising opportunities with Windows 8 Ads in Apps. Bringing partners on board from the beginning is vital to the long-term success of the Windows 8 ecosystem. Working together in the co-ideation process demonstrates what can be gained from great collaboration when you involve creativity and technology. It’s exciting to see how we’re driving innovation in this opportunity to create new industry standards.

We’ve enjoyed digging in and getting creative with folks from the IAB creative board including Big Spaceship, Razorfish, Team Detroit, Universal McCann and Y&R Group on blue sky thinking for in-app ad concepts, as we are considering Windows 8 a brand new advertising canvas that offers endless opportunities. The connected user interface and unique, fluid design of Windows 8 will encourage people to explore and discover ads without disrupting their experience. Based on that, we set out not to just create new ad formats – our goal was to rethink the entire experience.

The results of our co-ideation sessions and work are the first five unique, custom advertising scenarios that feature major brand campaign concepts within marquee publisher apps – including Delta Airlines in an NBC News app, Finish Line in an LA Times app, Ford Fusion in a Chicago Tribune app, Jeep in an AccuWeather app and Goldfish Crackers in a Slacker Radio app. Below is snapshot of each, which you can also see in a quick video with our partners here.

Delta is launching a new advertising campaign called “Up” that is all about upping the ante in travel with the airline. The Razorfish creative team leveraged the unique, creative campaign and content of “Up” to conceptualize a Windows 8 Ads in Apps concept for Delta in the NBC News app that is an intuitive, contextually relevant and immersive experience, which is ideal for a tablet. When in the NBC News app, a user can initiate the ad by touching on the Delta tile so that it expands up the screen. The user can swipe ‘up’ to continue a visual journey of a travel experience—from checking in at the airport, to bags going up the ramp, until the plane is up in the sky—that is simple and aspirational. Once the experience is closed, users are returned to the NBC News app content.

Big Spaceship came up with a simple, yet compelling concept for Finish Line called, "Elements Change, Running's Eternal." The Big Spaceship team was excited about how Windows 8 encourages advertisers to create ads that deserve attention, rather than simply shouting messages, blinking repeatedly or interrupting people. As a result, the Windows 8 Ads in Apps concept for Finish Line is beautiful and fun to explore. In the sports section of the LA Times app, the Finish Line ad opens into a panoramic format that show a day in the life of a female athlete who loves to run. The concepts encourages people to follow her journey while showcasing Finish Line products through strategically placed “hot spots” on the runner that allows people to touch to learn more.

Team Detroit created a Windows 8 Ads in Apps concept for Ford Fusion’s new ad campaign that leveraged the consumer-first architecture of Windows 8 to tell a story and present content in a way that is non-intrusive and within the context of what the consumer wants and when. The team created an advertising concept with a dynamic background that is subtle and contextual, and empowers the user to control their brand experience. Shown within the Chicago Tribune app, as consumers scroll left to right, they see environmental changes in the background that are brought to life through dynamic layering of elements and timeline based animation with three advertisement spots highlighting various components of the Ford Fusion story.

Universal McCann/Sapient created a dynamic Windows 8 Ads in Apps concept for Jeep within the AccuWeather app that speaks to how its new vehicle is ready for all weather. Once inside the AccuWeather app, the user scrolls through the content to the right until they come to the end and ‘bump’ into the Jeep ad, which features engaging animation and a beautiful experience that encourages users to click. Once a user engages, the Jeep ad expands to a full-screen experience where the user can thumb through informative text, graphics and video elements.

Pepperidge Farm is looking to expand beyond its typical moms audience to reach teens – which is known as challenging to connect with in general. Y&R identified Slacker Radio as an ideal publishing partner to reach teens in their environment, and developed a Windows 8 Ads in Apps concept featuring a branded experience without having to leave the app. Y&R had to make it more than just awareness – with teens it’s all about selling indirectly to them to get them engaged. The team created the “Music Visualizer” with Goldfish Crackers that can play or work with any kind of music within the Slacker Radio app. The Goldfish crackers jump and literally dance to the music based on the beat/sound wave experience.

The pairings were determined through ongoing conversations between the agencies, brands and publishers with the goal of matching like-minded audiences and creating organic, contextually relevant experiences. For instance, Jeep partnered with AccuWeather because weather is inherent to the driving experience and it mapped perfectly to their new all-weather, all-terrain Jeep vehicle.

These concepts showcase how digital advertising can be more interactive and revolve around customer-initiated experiences that can be beautiful, relevant and useful. Our agency partners already agree that the potential for creative innovation is great – just see what they had to say.

“Microsoft has over 1.3 billion customers… if you’re a global brand, Microsoft is the most relevant player in that ecosystem. They’re ones that you really have to partner with. I think Windows 8 is going to be that next evolution.” Eric Baumgartner, Chief Innovation Officer, Y&R Group

“Windows 8 allows us to tell stories …over a long period of time. It doesn't have to be a single or a one-hit wonder. …The ad formats are innovative, breakthrough, not too overt. It’s about connecting, and the ability to make an impact.” David Cohen, SVP, Universal McCann Interactive

“The way that Windows works is changing the very definition of an [agency] team today.” Margaret Cziesler, National Lead, Strategic Alliances, Razorfish

Hope everyone enjoys the rest of Advertising Week!

Stephen Kim, General Manager of Yarn (formerly Global Creative Solutions) for Microsoft Advertising
