Earlier this week, I noted a new suite of police-policing apps including OpenWatch and Cop Recorder, which turn your phone into a “reverse surveillance camera” for secretly recording run-ins with authority figures. Now it appears that police are well aware of those programs and others that complicate law enforcement, and at least some cops are none too happy about them.

That’s one of the revelations of the latest operation by the hacker group LulzSec, which yesterday dumped a cache of files that it stole from the Arizona Police Department, calling Arizona a “racial profiling anti-immigrant police state.” A pair of documents among the hundreds leaked show concerns about how smartphones are being used for everything from recording interactions with police to evading speed traps.

One document labelled “Law Enforcement Sensitive” lists the following apps, and warns officers to “take the time to look at an arrestee’s cell phone to see what applications they have.”

Cop Recorder: Developed under the OpenWatch project, the app lets users stealthily record their interactions with police or other authority figures and upload them to OpenWatch’s server, where some of the videos are anonymized and posted online with legal analysis. The latest version of the app for Android, called OpenWatch rather than Cop Recorder, allows the secret capturing of video as well as audio.

Trapster and Police Alert: Both apps aim to show users the location of speed traps. The free app Trapster crowdsources the problem, allowing users to add or confirm police locations, even tracking users’ reputations to improve the accuracy of their submissions. Police Alert, a $3.99 app for Android, seems to map out police locations without user interaction, but users warn in reviews that it rarely updates and is largely inaccurate.

Caller ID Faker: Users can spoof a call’s source through the Web or using an app for Android or for jailbroken iPhones, entering whatever ID number they choose and even altering their voice. Presumably police fear that the app, which offers what its website calls “good laughs to make it through the crazy stress of each day,” has led to an increase in prank 911 calls.

Another document from LulzSec’s hacked collection, provided to Arizona’s police from the Department of Justice’s Computer Crime and Intellectual Property division, describes concerns over Apple’s “find my iPhone” feature, which allows users to remotely wipe their phone’s data. The Department warns that users may delete evidence from seized phones.

Law enforcement’s solution? Keep seized phones in metal-plated Faraday bags or other radio-frequency-shielded container until their data can be copied.

Here’s the full PDF of that “Find my iPhone” brief.

Leaking its smartphone-related documents is the least of the Arizona police’s worries after the LulzSec hack. In a response to the breach, officials have warned that it could lead to retaliation against individual officers in the state. “Law enforcement officials go to many lengths to protect their identities,” Arizona Highway Patrol Association president Jimmy Chavez wrote in a statement Thursday.  “These individuals maliciously released confidential information knowing the safety of DPS employees, and their families, would be compromised.  A threat to release more DPS files demonstrates how heinous the hackers are willing to act. The AHPA would like to see the people brought to justice and prosecuted to the highest degree of the law.”
