California, the nation’s biggest state in terms of population, has left GOP strategists worried as Democrats gain stronger grounds, getting hold of the governorship and nearly every statewide office.

California is the home of every 1 in 8 Americans living in the country right now. However, for the last couple of years, the state is gradually edging towards Democratic political control threatening the small number of GOP members in the Legislature to lose even that weak control that they still might have regarding the decisions taken at the statehouse, according to a report by Associated Press.

"Republican leaders should look at California and shudder," says Steve SchmidtSteve Schmidt, who managed John McCain's 2008 campaign and anchored former Republican Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's re-election team in 2006. "The two-party system has collapsed."

The Democrats have not just picked up in three out of five of the congressional races; the party has also secured both chambers in the Legislature. Moreover, the voter registration has also reached an all time low to less than 30 percent. Obama’s victory over GOP presidential candidate, Mitt RomneyMitt Romney, has made the game even tougher for the conservatives.

Just two decades ago, California was considered to be pure Republican turf with names like Richard NixonRichard Nixon and Roland Reagan dominating presidential contests. However, a new surge of immigrants to the already populated state has shifted the numbers in favor of the Democrats. A major factor in Obama’s victory was his unshakable support of Hispanic and Asian voters, while 9 out 10 blacks also voted for him. a majority of the women voters were also leaning towards Obama.

"There are demographic changes in the American electorate that we saw significantly, first, here in California and Republicans nationally are not reacting to them," said Jim Brulte, a former Republican leader in the California Senate.

"Romney overwhelmingly carried the white vote — 20 years ago, that would have meant an electoral landslide. Instead, he lost by 2 million votes" in the state, Brulte said. Currently, in Orange Country, once mainly White, the total white population is just about 40 percent; while every 2 in 10 residents are Asian and every 1 in 3 is Hispanic.

Analysts believe that Mitt Romney’s election winning strategy applied in the state was that of 1980’s because now the demographics are a lot different than they were in Ronald ReaganRonald Reagan times. President of conservative California Republican Assembly, Celeste Greig, agrees that the party desperately needs organization and direction.
