Apparently they forgot to tell Mitt Romney that the job of “whiney failed GOP presidential candidate” is already taken.

Though in all fairness to Mitt Romney, it’s difficult for a man who’s worth at least a quarter of a billion dollars to see the world in any terms other than financial.

So perhaps that’s why Romney thinks that President Obama helping advance the civil rights and overall health of all Americans is some kind of political payoff.  That’s because Republicans don’t really approach the job of President the same way as Democrats.

Republicans seek the job either because they believe in the divine right of kings – America owes them the job – or because they want to give stuff, as Bill O’Reilly puts it, to their rich corporate benefactors.  Democrats, on the other hand, take the job because they actually want to address the country’s problems and make life here better for everyone.

Romney didn’t offer people a better life.  He actually offered them money, in the form of a $5 trillion tax cut for the rich.

And it still didn’t work.

What’s odd, or funny, or both is that Romney doesn’t even realize that he’s criticizing the President for what he actually did.  He offered Americans a $5 trillion tax cut.  Though, again, in all fairness, it was actually a tax increase on the middle class, so he wasn’t giving stuff, he was taking stuff from people who didn’t have stuff to begin with, in order to give it to those who already did.

How’d that work out for him?

“In each case they were very generous in what they gave to those groups,” Mr. Romney said. “With regards to the young people, for instance, a forgiveness of college loan interest, was a big gift,” he said. “Free contraceptives were very big with young college-aged women. And then, finally, Obamacare also made a difference for them, because as you know, anybody now 26 years of age and younger was now going to be part of their parents’ plan, and that was a big gift to young people. They turned out in large numbers, a larger share in this election even than in 2008.”

So let’s walk through that list one more time of things that Mitt Romney sees as, essentially, bribes:

And even weirder, these are the kind of things that Mitt Romney used to actually believe in, and may still to this day.  So why is he still wearing that weird “I’m a severe conservative” drag?  Why he’s back to the old 47% stuff again?  He thinking of running again?  (Or maybe this is the “real” Romney, if there is such a thing.)

But why stop there?  You know what else President Obama “gave” Americans in order to con them into voting for him?

There’s more, but those are the top ones that come to mind at the moment.

The thing is, that’s what leaders are supposed to do.  Do good stuff for their people to help make life better for all of us.  The fact that Mitt Romney doesn’t get that, the fact that he thinks this is somehow evil and greedy – but his rich buddies who get stuff by tearing apart companies and putting people out of work aren’t evil – speaks volumes to why the American people rejected him resoundingly one week ago.
