Mitt Romney was far from being the only Republican thinker “shellshocked” by his defeat. So was the author of this elegant communication I’d received after a column predicting that the 2012 election would mark the end of Richard Nixon’s “Southern strategy.”

“You are such a liar. You are not a journalist or a columnist, but rather a whore for the Democratic Party… November will solve the problem when we kick your Satanic ilk out of our government. May you get a form of incurable cancer and die a long and painful death.”

Needless to say, my pious interlocutor mentioned no particulars. People like him never do. However, my intuitions proved correct: As far as the electoral college is concerned, the GOP has turned into a strictly Confederate/Cow State party.

In the short term, stunned disbelief and futile posturing are apt to prevail. Why change what’s never worked since 1865?

But the rest of us shouldn’t feel too smug. The nation has experienced a brush with disaster. Who’d have guessed that The $250 Million Man was as vulnerable to having smoke blown up his wazoo as George W. Bush?

There’s no telling what mad crusades Romney’s neoconservative advisors might have talked him into launching.

One expects a degree of competence in a tycoon; a money guy is supposed to be a numbers guy. That Mitt Romney was as deluded about his chances as Karl Rove, Dick Morris, Rush Limbaugh, Sean Hannity, Glenn Beck, Mike Huckabee, Peggy Noonan, Charles Krauthammer and the rest of the GOP Marching and Chowder Society comes as a shock.

Even The Washington Post’s persnickety George Will forecast a Romney landslide. The scholarly pundit opined that even Minnesota would back Mitt. Will reasoned that a marriage amendment would bring out hordes of Michelle Bachmann supporters.

Adepts of the Fox News infotainment cult ought to be asking themselves tough questions. “On the biggest political story of the year,” writes The Atlantic’s Conor Friedersdorf, “the conservative media just got its [posterior] handed to it by the mainstream media. And movement conservatives, who believe the MSM is more biased and less rigorous than their alternatives, have no way to explain how their trusted outlets got it wrong, whileThe New York Times got it right. Hint: The Times hired the most rigorous forecaster it could find.”

His name is Nate Silver, a number-crunching whiz-kid who came to politics after helping to revolutionize baseball stats. His FiveThirtyEight blog aggregates and analyzes data from as many state and national polls as he can find—operating on the principle that the larger the sample, the smaller the margin of error.
