If you thought a lot of people were signing up in favor of Texas seceding from the U.S., they’re nothing compared to the numbers on a new petition asking retailer Macy’s to dump their sponsorship of real estate mogul Donald Trump.

As of Friday morning, a total of 637,509 people signed MoveOn.org’s petition asking that Macy’s stop putting on events and releasing advertisements fearuting the conservative conspiracy theorist who has hounded President Barack Obama for years with false allegations about his citizenship.

But it’s not just the petition: activists are bombing Twitter with photos of cut up Macy’s cards and leaving gentle encouragement to reconsider Trump on Macy’s Facebook page.

Among a variety of reasons for dumping Trump, the petition says that he’s “long engaged in sexist behavior,” used his “public platform to deny the reality of climate change” and “perpetuated the racially charged birther conspiracy.”

Responding to the petition, Macy’s spokesperson Holly Thomas told Ad Age, “Many of the individuals associated with products sold at Macy’s — or at any retailer, for that matter — express personal opinions that are not related to the merchandise we sell or to the philosophies of our company.”

She added that the Macy’s holiday ad campaign, which features Trump checking to see if Santa Clause’s beard is real or not, is in keeping with their tradition of celebrating “the season’s spirit of generosity and goodwill.”

The conflation of Trump and generosity is, however, striking given Trump’s recent attempt to extort Obama for charity. In the weeks leading up to the president’s reelection, Trump claimed that if Obama would release his birth certificate and college transcripts, he’d give $5 million to charity. In the wake of Hurricane Sandy, however, he didn’t back off the pitch, claiming he would simply extend his deadline for Obama to react, prompting thousands of angry reactions online.

The president has released his birth certificate twice, and did not acknowledge Trump’s latest publicity stunt.

This video was published to YouTube by Macy’s on November 7, 2012.
