Ted Nugent is continuing to attack Americans for re-electing President Obama, using his latest Washington Times column to state, "If you voted for Mr. Obama, you are thunderously dumb and incredibly naïve."

The National Rifle Association board member also comments that he has "a rotting fence post smarter than these mouth breathers" and declares, "Twenty years ago, the results would have been different. America wasn't nearly as stupid back then as we are today." 

Shortly after Obama's election victory, Nugent took to Twitter to state that Americans "voted for economic & spiritual suicide" because Obama will "destroy America." He also referred to Obama's supporters as "subhuman varmint[s]" and "Pimps whores & welfare brats & their soulless supporters."

Nugent is one of many conservative commentators who have reacted to the election's result by revealing his contempt for American voters.

Nugent, who frequently uses violent and inflammatory rhetoric, was recently the subject of a Discovery Channel documentary. 

We have fallen far and fast. Instead of electing a serious-minded, proven professional, America went once again with a guy whose most impressive qualification is that of a questionable "Chicago" community organizer. I don't mean Chicago in a geographic sense. President John F. Kennedy would have been appalled. Instead of asking not what our country can do for us but what we can do for our country, in just 50 years since Kennedy uttered that famous phrase, it appears that a majority of Americans now demand that their country do for them. It's America turned upside-down. We have decayed into a nation of gluttonous, soulless pigs who feast on whatever Fedzilla provides by taking from one group of Americans (the producers) and giving to others (the takers) who haven't earned it and don't deserve it. I'm not nearly as surprised with the outcome of the presidential election as I'm disheartened and disgusted that my fellow Americans can be this woefully uninformed, easily manipulated and thunderously ignorant. I've got a rotting fence post smarter than these mouth breathers. If you voted for Mr. Obama, you are thunderously dumb and incredibly naive. Believe it. For your intentional ignorance, you will ultimately pay a heavy price that you are obviously too ignorant to understand. Your children and grandchildren will pay an even heavier burden. America will pay the heaviest burden. Thanks for nothing, numbskulls. Twenty years ago, the results would have been different. America wasn't nearly as stupid back then as we are today. The presidential election proves that the dumbing down of America is complete. The cultural tapestry of America is changing with more people of color inhabiting America and voting. I have no issue with that. What I have issue with is anyone believing he is owed something without working for it and a president who agrees. That's considered un-American by the roughly 50 percent of us smart enough to have voted for Mr. Romney, the far better choice.
