Background on Eric Cantor:      January 20, 2009, Eric Cantor plotted to sabotage the US Economy on January 20, with Paul Ryan and 11 other Republican Congressmen as outlined in Robert Draper's book and written about in DKos Diary here

Fast Forward to November 7, 2012:      The day after the election, Bob Woodward told Sean Hannity that a few weeks before the election, Romney supporters went to his house and told him they had a government informant they wanted Woodward to meet with.

    Was Eric Cantor one of the people Woodward referred to as "some people close to Romney?"

      Was Eric Cantor the "somebody in a very sensitive position in the US government?" -- or -- was that person the shirtless FBI dude?

      Woodward went on and told Hannity that at first the man did not show up but when they finally met, the man did not have first hand information.

     Was Woodward describing the FBI investigation on the cyber-bullying from Petraeus' lover when he said "this person and that person ... are digging into it?

Conversation with Eric Cantor's office:             I have a friend who is a student studying journalism and is writing a paper on the Benghazi ambush who called Eric Cantor's office and asked if the shirtless FBI informant mentioned anything about Benghazi to Eric Cantor and then asked if Eric Cantor met with Bob Woodward.

      A man named "Jimmy" answered Eric Cantor's DC phone line and after telling my friend he did not know the answers to the questions, he said that Cantor's office was told not to talk about any of "it."

     Only written notes were taken on the phone call to Eric Cantor's office. From those notes:

STUDENT: Did the FBI agent disclose any information to Eric Cantor regarding Benghazi STUDENT: "After the agent talked to Eric Cantor, did Eric Cantor meet with the author Bob Woodward?" JIMMY: "I don't know that either." STUDENT: "Is there anyone in Eric Cantor's office, like maybe his Communication's Director, who can give me the answers?" JIMMY: "No one is supposed to talk about it." STUDENT: "really? No one is supposed to talk about it?  Can I quote you on that in my paper?" STUDENT: "Can I ask you another question?" STUDENT: "Can you tell me why Eric Cantor instructed his office not talk about it?" JIMMY: "No, I don't know why."

      Like I said, only written notes were taken on the phone call to Eric Cantor's office.  Anyone reading can feel free to call Cantor's office to see if they can get any more information from them.   Eric Cantor DC - phone (202) 225-2815

Conversation with Dave Reichert's office:        The press has reported that the shirtless FBI Agent spoke with Rep. Dave Reichert (R) before talking to Cantor.  The student called Rep. Dave Reichert's office and spoke with Zack.

STUDENT: Did the FBI agent disclose any information to Dave Reichert regarding Benghazi ZACK: "I am not authorized to answer that." STUDENT: "Can you answer this, after the agent talked to Dave Reichert, did Reichert meet with the author Bob Woodward?" ZACK: "I don't know that either." STUDENT: Can you tell me why Rep. Reichert told you not to answer questions about this?

Bob Woodward:      Finally, the student tried to reach Bob Woodward at the Washington Post but only got his voice mail.  To my knowledge, Mr. Woodward has not contacted the student back.   Washington Post Main Line: (202) 334-6000

      Obviously there is nothing wrong with Cantor or Reichert forbidding his staff from talking about anything ... including their contact with the Shirtless FBI guy and/or Bob Woodward.

       But, I really would like to know if Cantor did go to Romney's people and/or Bob Woodward.  

       After all, it was Eric Cantor who plotted to sabotage the US Economy on January 20, 2009 with Paul Ryan and 14 other Republican Congressmen as outlined in Robert Draper's book and written about in DKos Diary here
