An ABC News affiliate in Denver says that while attempting to report on the resignation of former CIA Director David Petraeus, the station mistakenly aired a photoshopped version of his mistress’ book with the raunchy title “All Up In My Snatch.”

KMGH-TV producer Deb Stanley told Raw Story that the wrong book cover had been “mistakenly picked up off the Internet” and aired during their 5 p.m. broadcast on Monday. Instead of displaying the actual book cover of Paula Broadwell’s Petraeus biography, “All In,” KMGH-TV aired the parody cover, “All Up In My Snatch.”

“That actually happened and it was a mistake,” Stanley explained. “And it was not something we created. We don’t want that mistake out there.”

While the KMGH-TV did not post the segment on its website, a viewer captured video of the broadcast and provided it to Americablog.

And it was clear from comments posted on KMGH’s TheDenverChannel.com that several other viewers also caught the mistake.

“Not sure at all where you got your picture of Broadwell’s book for your 5pm news cast,” one viewer wrote. “I AM sure the title is NOT ‘ALL up IN my snatch’ ‘the education of General David Patraeus’ as you showed. I believe it is simply titled “All In”. Clever photoshopping by someone – - not so clever use of sources for a news cast!”

“I saw it too!” another viewer added. “I have been looking for, at the very least, an apology from 7 News. I hope someone’s head is on the chopping block; this was inexcusable behavior.”

Stanley could not confirm to Raw Story whether an apology or correction would be forthcoming from the station.

Update (4 p.m. ET): KMGH-TV News Director Jeff Harris released a statement calling the mistake a “regrettable and an embarrassing error.”

“We are mortified this appeared during our 5 p.m. news broadcast,” Harris said. “The editor pulled the image of the book cover from the Internet without realizing it had been doctored. We sincerely regret the error and have corrected the story to avoid any recurrence of its broadcast. We are following up internally as well to avoid a repeat of this inexcusable oversight.”
