House Majority Leader Eric Cantor spoke to an FBI whistle-blower two weeks ago who accused then-CIA Director David Petraeus of having an extramarital affair and potentially jeopardizing the security of classified information, according to a news report.

Cantor’s chief of staff, Steve Stombres, later spoke with FBI officials to pass on the accusations from the whistle-blower, the New York Times reported on Saturday night.

(Also on POLITICO: 6 questions on Petraeus’s exit)

The FBI had been investigating Petraeus for several months after his alleged mistress, author Paula Broadwell, was suspected of sending “harassing” e-mails to another woman close to Petraeus.

(Also on POLITICO: Reports: Probe began with 2 women)

There were also concerns that Broadwell may have obtained sensitive information via her ties to Petraeus.

But the revelation of Cantor’s role in the scandal - and the emergence of an FBI whistle-blower - raises dramatic new questions about how the bureau conducted what was clearly a hugely sensitive problem, both in terms of the FBI’s relationship with the CIA and what it could mean for the highly esteemed Petraeus.

It also raises the stakes for the political fallout surrounding the scandal. Top CIA officials have been asked to brief members of the House Intelligence Committee next week on what happened and how the case unfolded.

“I was contacted by an F.B.I. employee concerned that sensitive, classified information may have been compromised and made certain [FBI] Director Mueller was aware of these serious allegations and the potential risk to our national security,” Cantor said in a statement.

Petraeus resigned on Friday after 14 months atop the CIA while admitting to an extramarital affair. The announcement stunned Washington, as lawmakers, Obama administration officials and the press scrambled to find out the reasons behind his abrupt departure.

James Clapper, director of National Intelligence, only learned about the FBI probe on Tuesday, according to news reports. Following discussions with Petraeus, Clapper told the CIA director he should resign. Petraeus then met with President Barack Obama on Thursday to inform him of that decision.

The informant was brought to Cantor’s attention by Rep. David Reichert (R-Wash.). Reichert declined to comment on his role in the scandal.

A Cantor aide said Stombres spoke with FBI officials on Oct. 31 to pass on the allegations about Petraeus.

Cantor’s office declined to provide more information beyond saying that the New York Times report “was accurate.”

It is unclear if Cantor told Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) or other top House Republicans - including Intelligence Committee Chairman Mike Rogers (Mich.) - of the allegations surrounding Petraeus.
