Immediately after the election, some Republicans talked about how, if the GOP is to remain viable, it should be reaching out to minorities who represent a growing American demographic. Meanwhile, on Fox, there was talk about how the Obama victory was based on the votes of those lazy slobs who want "entitlements" which is right wing code talk for "welfare," - a blaring, racist dog whistle. Leading the pack was Bill O'Reilly who, on election night, said that "there are 50% of the voting public who want stuff. They want things. And who is going to give them things? President Obama." Following up on Bill O'Reilly was another privileged white dude who, like Bill, is upset about the demise of the white, American patriarchy. On Fox & Friends, Judge Andrew Napolitano provided validation for O'Reilly in what seemed to be a new Fox meme that underscores the hateful class warfare fostered by Fox News - not the way to win minorities!

Last week, on the same day that Steve Doocy and Mark Steyn advanced the bogus Obama Phone in a discussion about slackers who want free stuff, Judge Napolitano said that he agreed with Bill O'Reilly's "free stuff" comment that echoes what Mitt Romney said during his NAACP speech. The chyron blew the racist dog whistle: "Welfare Nation Entitlements Soar Under President Obama." After playing video of O'Reilly famous "stuff" comment, privileged white Steve Doocy proclaimed that under "Obama's watch, people got more stuff than ever." Privileged white Gretchen Carlson asked if there has been "an entitlement explosion" during the first term of the Obama presidency which helped him "lock up a second term." She cited how we've reached a "tipping point" with 50% of the population "getting a government hand-out." She explained that while "entitlements" cover vets, Social Security, and Medicare, the topic is "food stamps, welfare."

While the chyron cited Obama's "Entitlement Explosion," The Judge opined that this is a "dangerous situation" predicted by Jefferson and Hamilton who cautioned that when the "public trough" is opened, voters will "only send to the government people who will only promise to bring back a bigger piece of the pie." (Like corporate and defense lobbyists looking for contracts and tax breaks?) Napolitano warned that those who "receive from the trough as the legal tools with which to fill the trough from" (his voice got louder) "from the pocket books and bank accounts of the other half."

The chyron reinforced the agitprop: "Positive Impact?, Obama Camp Touts Welfare Success." Privileged white Brian Kilmeade extended the "trough" metaphor while the Judge "joked" "get the pigs out here." As the chyron promoted the welfare slacker message, "Promoting Dependency, Welfare, Food Stamp Spending Surge," Brian wanted to know why we are treating "bread winners" so "harshly." Napolitano said that the president "knows the short term political gain...as a result of giving away cash now. They don't see that every dollar they take away from taxpayers whether they make a million dollars or a billion dollars is a dollar less to invest in the economy and produce prosperity and jobs." (Rather than Cayman Island accounts or family trusts?) He claimed that raising taxes means less economic activity. (Like during the Clinton years?)

Doocy summed it up: "What you're telling us is this class warfare is going to go on for a long time." Napolitano repeated that O'Reilly is right because he "put his finger on the entire meaning of the evening. The people who want stuff are a statistical majority of voters in the country." Gretchen Carlson added that "it's a mind set." Napolitano again said that O'Reilly is right about how the majority of the country "no longer embrace the traditions that we were taught as children and our parents and grandparents and ancestors. Things are changing right before our eyes, and we need to be aware of what’s happening." (Interestingly, Gretchen Carlson made a similar comment about single mothers.)

Of all the vile things being said about those who need the social safety net, this is the most reprehensible. Yet, Napolitano identifies as a devout, pro-life Catholic. It's not a question of people "wanting free stuff." It's about those who need some assistance so that they can pay the rent, feed their children, and access medical care. The Fox fiends don't seem to realize that many food stamp recipients are working and those who access subsidized child care do so in order to keep working. There are many poor veterans who are on food stamps. It's possible that those who clean the toilets for Fox News asses might be on food stamps. Actual welfare (TANF) expenditures have dropped and TANF expenditures are Less Than Two Tenths Of 1 Percent Of The Budget - far less than what defense contractors get from their "trough." But the "traditions" thing is scary as that is reminiscent of what the Nazis said about Jews. Anyway, it's not Obama voters who are engaging in class warfare, it's the patriotic Fox News which seeks to further divide Americans!
