PORTLAND, Me. — Elated by their first ballot victories, in four states, advocates of same-sex marriage rights plan to push legislatures in half a dozen more states toward legalization as they also press their cause in federal courts. They are also preparing for what they hope will be another milestone: the electoral reversal of a constitutional amendment defining marriage as solely between a man and a woman, in Oregon in 2014.

Nine states and Washington, D.C., have now legalized same-sex marriage. Though it remains unpopular in the South, rights campaigners see the potential for legislative gains in Delaware; Hawaii; Illinois; Rhode Island; Minnesota, where they beat back a restrictive amendment last Tuesday; and New Jersey, where Gov. Chris Christie vetoed a bill to legalize same-sex marriage in February.

A rapid shift in public opinion is bolstering their cause as more people grow used to the idea of same-sex marriage and become acquainted with openly gay people and couples. “The pace of the change in opinions has picked up over the last few years,” said Michael Dimock, associate research director of the Pew Research Center in Washington, “and as the younger generation becomes a larger share of the electorate, the writing is on the wall.”

A close look at this year’s campaigns, from Maine to Washington State, shows how rights activists intend to hasten that shift in the future, relying especially on patient, labor-intensive personal dialogue.

Here in Maine, voters rejected same-sex marriage only three years ago, 53 percent to 47 percent. Mainers United for Marriage, which advocates same-sex marriage rights, phoned some 250,000 residents or knocked on their doors, engaging many of them in 20-minute conversations about love, marriage and commitment and persuading some to rethink their views. “We asked people what marriage meant in their lives,” said Matt McTighe, the group’s campaign manager.

Last Tuesday the numbers were reversed, with Maine legalizing same-sex marriage by 53 percent to 47 percent.

Douglas Emmons, 52, of Biddeford voted against gay marriage in 2009 but changed his mind this year, he said, after urging by his daughter, a recent college graduate, and an hourlong discussion with Randy Hazelton, a field organizer for Mainers United for Marriage.

“It’s still something that’s uncomfortable; it doesn’t seem quite natural,” Mr. Emmons said. “But I guess everybody should have an equal chance at marriage if they want it.”

In the latest state elections, rights advocates also moved beyond abstract appeals about civil rights, using advertisements that hit home with more conflicted voters, said Amy Simon, a pollster with Goodwin Simon Strategic Research in Oakland, Calif., who advised the rights campaigns in Maine and Washington.

Many television commercials presented loving, committed gay and lesbian couples or endorsements from straight, respected people from unexpected corners of the community, like a firefighter in Maine.

The advocates benefited from a threefold advantage in fund-raising, with large donations in Washington State from Jeff Bezos of Amazon and his wife and from Bill and Melinda Gates, and large personal contributions to all four campaigns from Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg of New York. But most of the money came as small donations, raised nationally by gay-rights groups.

The most ardent opponents of same-sex marriage, led by evangelical Christians and the Roman Catholic Church, have vowed to redouble their defense of “natural marriage,” even comparing it to the continuing fight against legal abortion.

So far, these opponents say they do not believe that the national tide has shifted against them but rather that they allowed themselves to be badly outspent in liberal-leaning states.

“We lost by small margins in bastions of deep-blue America,” said Brian S. Brown, president of the National Organization for Marriage. He noted that 30 states have constitutional amendments banning same-sex marriage. He said he expected Indiana to vote on such an amendment in the next year or two, “and we will win.”
