The People’s Bailout, a variety show and telethon to benefit the 99%   The event will be livestreamed at www.rollingjubilee.org   Join Strike Debt for an updated version of an old classic, the telethon, to launch The Rolling Jubilee, a campaign that buys debt for pennies on the dollar and does away with it. Instead of collecting the debt, we will abolish it and help free the debtors!   People shouldn’t have to go into debt for an education, because they need medical care, or to put food on the table during hard times. We shouldn’t have to pay endless interest to the 1% for basic necessities. Big banks and corporations walk away from their debts and leave taxpayers to pick up the tab. It’s time for a bailout of the people, by the people.   It will be a wild night of music, comedy, magic, education, and the unexpected. This fast-moving variety show will mix well-known performers, intellectuals and activists from Strike Debt and Occupy Wall Street.   THE PEOPLE’S BAILOUT will feature music, comedy, education, magic, and the unexpected. Special guests include Janeane Garofalo, Lizz Winstead, Hari Kondabolu, David Rees, actor/director John Cameron Mitchell, Jeff Mangum of Neutral Milk Hotel, Lee Ranaldo of Sonic Youth, Guy Picciotto of Fugazi, Tunde Adebimpe and Kyp Malone of TV on the Radio, Climbing Poetree, the Invisible Army of Defaulters, Holistic, Kool A.D. and Dapwell of Das Racist, The Music Tapes, Rude Mechanical Orchestra, members of Healthcare for the 99%, Occupy Faith, and many more.   $25 (abolishes an estimated $500 worth of debt) $50 (abolishes an estimated $1000 worth of debt) $100 (abolishes an estimated $2000 worth of debt) $250 (abolishes an estimated $5000 worth of debt)   This is a general admission, standing event. No will-call name transfers will be honored.

The Rolling Jubilee is a project of Strike Debt, which emerged out of Occupy Wall Street and is dedicated to raising public awareness about predatory debt practices, debt resistance and mutual aid. Debt is the tie that binds the 99%, from recent graduates paying hundreds of dollars in interest every month on their student loans, to elderly homeowners underwater to the banks, to teachers and firefighters forced to take pay cuts because their cities are broke, to countries that that have to slash school and hospital budgets to pay back bondholders. Strike Debt links diverse individuals and communities to resist the debt system. Initiatives include publishing The Debt Resistors’ Operations Manual, hosting teach-ins and debt assemblies, supporting the Occupy Student Debt Campaign‘s pledge of student debt refusal, and creative direct actions across the country.   www.strikedebt.org

Actress and Comedian Janeane Garofalo has been an American institution since she burst on the scene in 1992.   In addition to acting in film and television, Janeane is an outspoken activist, spoken word performer and stand-up comedy entertainer known and respected around the country, and the world. As well, she was instrumental in the successful launching of the first liberal radio network, Air America Radio, where she hosted her own talk show, “The Majority Report.” A lightning rod for controversy, Janeane’s well informed opinions and unflinching honesty have inspired laughs, as well as striking a chord with the left, right and everyone in between. She is a noted peace activist.   Janeane has had many memorable and critically acclaimed roles in films such as “The Truth About Cats and Dogs,” “Steal This Movie,” “Copland,” “Reality Bites,” and “Duane Hopwood,” as well as for her specific brand of sharp wit and comedy shown in her roles in “Romy and Michelle’s High School Reunion,” “Bye Bye Love,” “Mystery Men,” “Clay Pigeons,” “The Minus Man” and “The Cable Guy,” directed by her friend Ben Stiller. Ben and Janeane also co-authored the best seller “Feel This Book,” (Ballantine May 1999). Janeane was also a cast member of the Emmy Award-winning Ben Stiller Show.   aneane played the role of Paula, the acerbic talent booker, on “The Larry Sanders Show,” for which she received an Emmy nomination in 1997 and two Cable Ace nominations. During the fall of ’94 she joined the cast of “Saturday Night Live.” Some of Janeane’s other television work includes two specials for HBO, the series finale of “Mad About You” and the critically lauded, final season of NBC’s “The West Wing,” where she played Democratic campaign strategist Louise Thornton.   In 2007, Janeane’s voice was featured in the Disney/Pixar animated comedy Ratatouille, and can be seen in Stella writer/director David Wain’s ensemble comedy, “The Ten.” Janeane can also be seen in her latest projects, the Lifetime movie “Girl’s Best Friend” and as a recurring character on the 2009 season of “24.”   Janeane lives in New York and Los Angeles.

As co-creator and former head writer of The Daily Show and Air America Radio co-founder, LIZZ WINSTEAD is one of the top political satirists in America. As a performer, LIZZ brought her political wit to The Daily Show as a Correspondent and later to the radio waves co-hosting Unfiltered, Air America Radio’s mid morning show, where she brought on board Hip Hop legend CHUCK D and political big brain RACHEL MADDOW.   LIZZ’S talents as a comedian and media visionary have been recognized by The New York Times, The Washington Post, Entertainment Weekly’s 100 most Creative People issue and has brought numerous television appearances, including Comedy Central Presents and as a regular contributor for MSNBC’s “The Ed Show” and “The Joy Behar Show.”   Most recently, Lizz wrote and produced an independent pilot of her Off-Broadway hit, “WAKE UP WORLD, a show Rachel Maddow called, “The funniest thing I have seen in years.”

According to the Seattle Times, Hari Kondabolu is “a young man reaching for the hand-scalding torch of confrontational comics like Lenny Bruce and Richard Pryor.” Like his comedic heroes, Hari Kondabolu wants to speak truth to power with confrontational and personal material. Unlike them, he does not want to die of a morphine overdose or set himself on fire.   Hari has performed on Jimmy Kimmel Live, Comedy Central’s Live at Gotham and John Oliver’s New York Standup Show and the 2007 HBO U.S. Comedy Arts Festival. His Comedy Central Presents half-hour television special debuted on the network in February 2011.   In addition to standup at colleges, clubs and fundraisers around the country, Hari also co-hosts the mostly improvised, monthly talk show The Untitled Kondabolu Brothers Project with his younger brother Ashok (“Dap” from hip hop group Das Racist) in New York City. Hari is also a former video blogger for WORLD COMPASS, a joint initiative between WGBH Boston, PBS and the Corporation for Public Broadcasting.   In 2009, he made his major motion picture acting debut in the 20th Century Fox Film All About Steve, which the Boston Globe’s Ty Burr said was “to comedy what leprosy once was to the island of Molokai: a plague best contemplated from many miles away.” (It should be noted that he had a very small part. It was tiny. He’s practically not even in the movie.)   Of more consequence, Hari’s short film MANOJ, which he wrote, starred in, and co-produced with director Zia Mohajerjasbi, was selected to play at the 2009 Just for Laughs Festival in Chicago, 2008 Just for Laughs Festival in Montreal and was a Finalist in the 2007-2008 Boston Motion Picture Awards. Unbelievably, the film was also licensed by “Showtime Arabia” in Dubai.   Hari was born and raised in Queens, NY. He went to Townsend Harris High School and the school’s mascot, “Hari the Hawk,” was named after him during his senior year. (He sometimes fears that his greatest achievement was accomplished at 17.) He also attended both Bowdoin College and Wesleyan University, graduating from the former institution with a B.A. in Comparative Politics in 2004. A former immigrant rights organizer in Seattle, Hari also earned a Masters in Human Rights from the London School of Economics in 2008, writing a merit- earning dissertation entitled “Mexican Returnees as Internally Displaced People: An Argument for the Protection of Economic Migrants Under the UN Guiding Principles on Internal Displacement.” This is, by far, the least funny thing he’s ever written.   http://www.harikondabolu.com/
