There is absolutely no spectrum crunch for AT&T Mobility, Clearwire, and Verizon Wireless! Others may not be so lucky although Softbank-Sprint-Clearwire could turn the current duopoly into a triopoly. Unfortunately the government repurposing FCC controlled (private sector) spectrum and holding more auctions is unlikely under the present rules to improve competition. Still, AT&T could just as easily spin those 40-some-odd deals into "See, there was a spectrum crunch. By not approving the merger, you just made us look elsewhere for the spectrum."I'm not trying to be an AT&T apologist, since all they're doing is hoarding spectrum anyway. I'm just saying that should the need arise, AT&T will just spin this news however they see fit and force feed it to those that are in charge. Still, AT&T could just as easily spin those 40-some-odd deals into "See, there was a spectrum crunch. By not approving the merger, you just made us look elsewhere for the spectrum." And everyone, except the big corporate haters, says there is and will be a spectrum crunch. So AT&T is just making sure the spectrum shortage doesn't affect them. Good planning on their part.--Impeach Obama and tie up government for next 2 yrs said by Dark Lobe And everyone, except the big corporate haters... Who is 'everyone' in relation to the 'big corporate haters'?Do the 'big corporate haters' not matter? I think everyone matters, including the 'big corporate haters'. Are 'big corporate haters' :A) People of large stature that hate corporationsOrB) People who hate big corporations but not small onesThe term is a little confusing. So you would agree that using LTE as an alternative to wireline service is not feasible, seeing as this spectrum crunch is looming over our heads. said by The Limit: So you would agree that using LTE as an alternative to wireline service is not feasible, seeing as this spectrum crunch is looming over our heads. Not necessarily. LTE protocol supports many different spectrum bands. Rural point-to-point connections to replace wireline could use frequencies not conducive to mobile use. Usage of non-mobile frequencies for landline replacement wouldn't conflict with mobile spectrum requirements and any spectrum crunch for mobile use.--Impeach Obama and tie up government for next 2 yrs In other words, there's no spectrum crunch. said by The Limit: In other words, there's no spectrum crunch. That isn't what I said. But you will believe what you want no matter what anyone says anyway. Forgive me, but what's the difference in a "fixed" LTE connection on a PC vs a a mobile LTE connection on a PC? Mobile connections would presumably consume less data right? In other words, what's the difference? I ask the question in all seriousness, not out of trolling. Of course I'm going to believe what I want to believe given the evidence.--"We will evaluate these integrals rigorously if we can, and non-rigorously if we must".---Victor Moll, invited talk, Tom Osler Fest (April 17, 2010) said by The Limit: So you would agree that using LTE as an alternative to wireline service is not feasible, seeing as this spectrum crunch is looming over our heads. Until the insane caps go away LTE is not an alternative to wireline services. We have others here who think otherwise, but it's a contradiction because of this looming doomsday. Give the carriers what they want and we will be fine and dandy. smh.--"We will evaluate these integrals rigorously if we can, and non-rigorously if we must".---Victor Moll, invited talk, Tom Osler Fest (April 17, 2010) Why is it that haters insist on there be a spectrum crunch BEFORE companies can act? That's like the morons that prepared for Sandy when it was an few hours away. How did that turn out for them? Are people that prepares for hurricane season in May stupid to you even though there is no threat of a hurricane and may not be one? Or are they being practical? Why is it that haters insist on there be a spectrum crunch BEFORE companies can act? That's like the morons that prepared for Sandy when it was an few hours away. How did that turn out for them? Are people that prepares for hurricane season in May stupid to you even though there is no threat of a hurricane and may not be one? Or are they being practical? Why is it the people who want to let corporate Amerika run roughshod and rip off people for all they are worth call those that want a semblance of honesty and truth to enter the discussion "haters"? There will some day be an oil shortage, so effective tomorrow Exon will be charging YOU $175.00 per gallon of gasoline and limit you to 3 gallons per week. I suppose you're fine with that too.--Isn't it sad that those that raise their right hand and swear "to support and defend the Constitution of the United States of America" are usually the ones most likely to trash it. Why is it the people who want to let corporate Amerika run roughshod and rip off people for all they are worth call those that want a semblance of honesty and truth to enter the discussion "haters"? +1. I like that description That depends on whether we solve the need by granting every available mhz to incumbents or if there is a need for an alternative that motivates new competitors invest and provide the additional capacity.If current players don't have a crunch but create one and then proceed to acquire all they can, it leaves competitors with whatever crumbs are left or leasing wholesale capacity from incumbents.There's nothing wrong with corporations doing all they can to increase their competitive edge. We expect no less from sports teams that exploit every possible talent achieve a winning record. However, when they try to do it by pulling a Jeff Gillooly (Tonya Harding), there has to be a good set of rules and a diligent referee/umpires/judge mechanism to prevent it. If it's already occurred, then they alert the executive branch so they can step in and enforce the rules.It's also part of every corporation's mission to complain about the rules and, if they can, get them changed to their advantage.The real question is do we have such rules and such a mechanism to adequately govern telecommunications free enterprise? Maybe we do. Maybe we don't.In closing, whats wrong with consumers voicing concerns in opposition of corporations that use every conceivable angle to separate us from our money and be successful? Why is it that haters insist on there be a spectrum crunch BEFORE companies can act? Because radio spectrum is finite and the available spectrum (except what's hoarded) is already being used by someone. If you have hurricane shutters, you wouldn't like it if the government said we have to take the hurricane shutters from your house because protecting this richer person's house is more important. The problem is with the way the spectrum was allocated. If there weren't so many different frequencies and so many different types of service allocated on certain frequencies this would be less of a problem. It's not that the big duo doesn't have enough spectrum, it's that they don't have enough of what they want. T has some 2300 WCS spectrum that they don't have in use yet but they are probably waiting for the right company to swap that to so they can get better spectrum. Just the same as Verizon not using the AWS spectrum that they have. It's all over the place though and makes deploying and making equipment to use all these frequencies more expensive. A two year "Use it or Lose it" policy with the spectrum holder required to show significant, meaningful progress towards using the spectrum for its intended purpose would solve the whole squatting problem and the alleged "crunch". Unfortunately, since our government is the best that can be bought, don't expect anything like that to happen.--Isn't it sad that those that raise their right hand and swear "to support and defend the Constitution of the United States of America" are usually the ones most likely to trash it. AT&T is one of the few businesses that can actually get away with and might even be better at lying, even more than our own government!! AT&T is one of the few businesses that can actually get away with and might even be better at lying, even more than our own government!! The CEO at AT&T, Randall Stephenson is greedy little prick and he certainly has gathered together a fine gaggle of lobbyists to cheat the regulations and get them changed as well.I made sure to tell the door to door folks that came around trying to pedal U verse that they should tell Mr. Stephenson that I'm not interested in purchasing service from a company that cannot even provide reasonable customer service. I had signed up for DSL and there was an issue with a broken NID on the outside post (AT&T's obligation to repair) I set up an appointment to have it replaced, and the service ticket was CANCELLED, called and they said they did not know why it was cancelled, made another service ticket for the repair, and it too was cancelled! Tried another time, and again the appointment was cancelled!!! OUTRAGEOUS!I never even was able to have service and luckily I was able to cancel the start of the service before I was billed.Funny how AT&T has plenty of help to lobby things their way but not enough help or competent help in customer service and repair.WHAT A JOKE !!!Randell .... you little money grubbing urchin. based on the model of their new deployment it follows with their claims that there is a limit to what you can do with limited spectrum. In the densely populated areas they are using IP dslams and out where the homes are scattered they can use an all LTE network. It seems to show the same theme. Maybe?
