Software giant Microsoft has just acquired another windfall following the successful debut of its new system, Windows 8, and first hardware entry, Surface RT, late last month. Surface RT tablet has just attained a huge backer in the person of the legendary philanthropist, Oprah Winfrey.

Outlined among other things in the official list of “Oprah’s Favorite Things 2012” is Microsoft’s brand new Surface tablet. The list is purportedly written personally by the queen of product endorsements.

Amidst all these excitements, however, comes news that the company is planning to launch Microsoft Surface Pro tablets in January next year.

Earlier reports disclosed that the software giant plans to roll out a follow-up model of the paramount Surface RT gadget – the Surface Pro Tablet, which is due to launch in January.

The Surface Pro is purportedly built to deliver a kind of Windows 8 experience that users would be used to seeing on their laptop or desktop computers. This is thought to fill the Surface RT’s missing components and limited applications.

Microsoft designed its Surface RT as an ARM-based tablet that is only capable of running Windows Store apps. It lacks the so-called legacy applications for users including several famous Microsoft app such as Windows Media Player or Outlook.

Microsoft is still aiming to create better marketing strategies for Windows 8 OS, Windows Phone 8, as well as for Surface tablets – “better” in the sense that consumers will be able to see its ads on magazines, television channels and on the Internet.

Oprah’s words could be the best endorsement Microsoft Surface RT could ever receive. It is, therefore, logical for the company to capitalize on the popularity its device could get. Furthermore, there are rumors suggesting Microsoft is planning to build its own smartphone. We might take it with a grain of salt for now but it seems like it would happen in the near future. After all, the company already shared its intention to compete with Apple and Google in the mobile market.
