Microsoft isn't just introducing a new tablet — it's got a couple of novel accessories up its sleeve too. I'm speaking, of course, about the clever hybrid products that do double duty as protective covers and physical keyboards, called the Touch Cover and the Type Cover.

The Touch Cover has been more visible in Microsoft's advertising of the Surface, and rightfully so. Not only is it a very new kind of product for tablets, but the company is offering it in a variety of bright colors that are extremely eye catching. While both the Touch and Type Cover snap onto the bottom of the tablet using a set of pogo connectors and a strong magnet, the Touch Cover is unique in that it's a physical keyboard with no moving parts. Instead, there is a set of raised keys on the soft, material-like surface. And not just keys, but a fully functional multitouch trackpad with two buttons.

On a desk or other flat surface, the Touch Cover works reasonably well. It doesn't come close to replicating a physical, tactile keyboard, but it does do a good job of reminding you where your fingers need to be. I was surprised that it often took a little more pressure on the keys to get input to register, but once I figured out the appropriate heaviness, it wasn't too much of an issue. My typing rate seemed to increase as I used the cover more, though I found myself mistyping and having to correct (and re-correct) errors I had made. It might be a matter of adjustment, but it wasn't a completely pain-free experience.

The Touch Cover feels excellent on the device from a screen protection standpoint, and it feels good when you wrap it over the back of the device (as you'd fold back a magazine or book). The Surface has a way of sensing what position the cover is in using its accelerometer, though I did experience a few glitches where the cover was on the back of the Surface, but still sending chaotic key presses to the device. Luckily this issue was few and far between.

The Type Cover is another story altogether — it's one of the best portable keyboards I've ever used. Like the Touch Cover, it functions as a screen protector, but unlike the Touch Cover, it has a full complement of great-feeling, tactile keys. Typing on it was akin to working on my MacBook Air, and I rarely made mistakes because of the size of the keyboard or the positioning of the keys. It really was a joy to use.

I do have two issues with the accessory, however. The first is that it's a bit uncomfortable to use when it's wrapped around the back of the device; feeling keys under your fingers is just not reassuring. Secondly, a handful of times I had keys pop up slightly off of their retainer, making for missed presses and the need to realign and replace the key where it should have been. It's not a huge deal, and it's certainly something that happens on laptop keyboards from time to time, but with all of the action this accessory will see, it is a little worrisome.

Both covers are relatively expensive ($119 for the Touch Cover and $129 for the Type Cover), and both have plusses and minuses — but I do think they make the Surface a more attractive device, and I think it's somewhat incomplete without at least one of them. Microsoft seems to agree, hence its $599 bundle that includes the Touch Cover. One caveat — you don't get to pick your color, so you might want to spend that extra $20, buy the pieces separately, and show off your wild side.
