In terms of highlights for Microsoft’s own Windows 8-style apps, this is where it ends. Some of the other built-in Windows 8-style apps are significantly lacking functionality. The Mail app includes basic email functions but little else. A conversation view is functional, but on occasions it bundles the wrong email threads together. The Photos app provides a great viewing experience, but editing is rather limited. Crop and rotation features are present, but red eye reduction and other color / tone adjustments are missing. The Messaging app provides the most basic way to use Windows Live Messenger or Facebook chat, with no option to initiate audio or video calls. This is basic functionality and Microsoft appears to have rushed some of these apps out of the door half baked. Microsoft has shown that it updates these apps regularly during the beta phases, so it’s safe to assume the company will continue to do so to address gaps of functionality. For basic tasks, the built-in apps work well — but compared to the experience on rival platforms, they fall short.

Microsoft’s Windows Store represents the acknowledgement of Apple’s success with a curated application store approach. Developers can submit free or paid apps and earn 70 percent of the revenue from sales, a figure that jumps to 80 percent after a paid app makes $25,000. Microsoft wants, and needs, to woo developers here. It’s fair to say that this part of Windows 8 is the most crucial point for the success or failure of the operating system — perhaps even the future of Windows. If developers flock to the store and submit applications that consumers are willing to use then it’s game on for Redmond. If, like Windows Phone, there’s a severe lack of quality applications then the long term health of the Windows ecosystem could be rightfully called into question.

Looking at the Windows Store today it’s clear there are not enough apps here to live exclusively in Microsoft’s new Windows 8-style world. A first batch of 29 Xbox Live games from Microsoft Studios are a good start on the gaming front, with Jetpack Joyride, Angry Birds Space, and Cut the Rope part of some top names that Windows needs. On the application side, the Windows Store is lacking the big names. Searches for Spotify or Rdio bring back a host of apps, but none of them are the official apps you’re looking for. Likewise, searches for Facebook and Twitter — two of the most popular social networks — provide only unofficial apps. On the Twitter side there’s some good alternatives, namely Rowi, MetroTwit, and Tweetro — but it’s a little concerning that Twitter hasn’t invested time itself to build an application for Windows 8.

Microsoft’s Skype team has invested a significant amount of time in building a Windows 8-style app and the result is impressive. It’s a good example of what can be done with Microsoft’s new Windows 8-style apps. However, it’s still questionable whether a desktop user with multiple displays or large 27-inch monitors will want to use applications that run on a single screen (even in a multiple monitor setup) and occupy an incredible amount of space. Microsoft is attempting to appease this type of use with a new Snap feature.

Similar to Aero Snap in Windows 7, Windows 8’s Snap lets you position two apps — desktop or Windows 8-style — alongside each other. Unfortunately, the Snap view is rather limited, with one app occupying a small amount of screen real estate (320 px) and the other taking the majority of the pixels available. A minimum resolution of 1366 x 768 is required for Snap, with a minimum resolution of 1024 x 768 for Windows 8-style apps. Snapping apps into place is an easy affair. Touch users can swipe slowly from the left edge and drag a thumbnail of an app into place. Mouse users can activate the Switcher in the top left hot corner and then drag an app into place. It’s a different approach and works well on tablet devices, allowing you to run two apps at the same time — something that’s not common on Android tablets and nonexistent on Apple’s iPad. If you were looking for the flexibility of the traditional Windows desktop with windowing and 50 / 50 snapping, this simply isn’t available. If you open a Windows 8-style app from the Start screen and then Snap it, you’re left with a blank space on the right or left until you open or Snap another app. Overall, Microsoft needs to improve this usage scenario in future releases, but it’s a differentiator for tablets.
