I've had the misfortune of experiencing first hand republican party politic s in my home state of Massachusetts. Those who were not on the Romney band wagon were removed as delegates, even though we were elected by the people. As a result many of us have become alienated and disenfranchised, and do not know for whom to cast our votes.

Had the GOP not treated us, their constituency, so disrespectfully, my attitude toward the presidential elections may be more cool. However, my associations with republicans have caused me to rethink my allegiances and positions. In a twist on the words of Groucho Marx, I don't want to belong to any club that would have Mitt Romney as a member.

What are the results of my rethinking my allegiances and positions? They are several. For one, the liberal press (vs the conservative press), is far more interested in accurate and honest reporting. As a result, I have begun to view liberals as more honest and willing to examine unfavorable facts about their candidate than the average conservative. This honesty is reflected in the candidates that they choose to represent them. While Obama isn't the perfect politician, he doesn't dodge facts or shift positions. He tells you his vision of America, even if it is controversial. Obama isn't ashamed of his political philosophy, and he explains his positions with clarity and detail.

I believe democrats care far more about the individual than republicans do. Republicans are only out for their selves, and as a result they nominated someone who is only our for his self. Romney doesn't even care about his own party. Democrats, on the other hand, care about each other, and as a result they nominated someone who shows an honest respect for his fellow citizen, regardless of partisanship. Obama cares about this country and its people, it clearly shows when he addresses us.

Democrats show a deeper respect for the political process. In my experience, democrats are more willing to accept victory or defeat as long as the political process was carried out fairly. They value the system, when carried out properly, for the results that it produces. Republicans, on the other hand, do not respect the system. They are greedy, deceitful, and full of malice.

I don't believe republicans are able to grasp reality if it doesn't line up neatly with their self interests. Democrats do not have this problem, they are far more willing to confront reality head on, and deal with real issues with real solutions.

I don't know about you, but I don't want to live in a world where everyone is at each others throats just to make a buck, where greed and deceit reign supreme. Obama is offering a clear alternative to the nightmarish reality that the republicans are offering. Obama's alternative has the United States seeking peace and cooperation, with honesty and mutual respect being its hallmarks, between ourselves and the rest of the world. Don't let the republicans steal this election. Obama is the superior choice.
