Three House Democrats on Tuesday called on the U.S. Department of Justice to investigate alleged voter registration fraud carried out by a firm hired by Republicans.

“We are writing today to urge the Department of Justice to conduct a multi-state investigation to determine if a pattern of voting registration irregularities related to Strategic Allied Consulting are connected and constitute a broader conspiracy of voter registration fraud,” Reps. Jim Moran (D-VA), Bobby Scott (D-VA), and Gerry Connolly (D-VA) wrote to Attorney General Eric Holder.

The Republican National Committee cut ties with Strategic Allied Consulting after Florida officials traced fraudulent registration forms back to the company. The firm, which is now facing more than 200 allegations of voter registration fraud in Florida, had been paid $2.9 million this year to register voters in five swing states: Florida, Virginia, Colorado, North Carolina and Nevada.

Last week, a voter registration supervisor employed by Pinpoint was arrested after allegedly destroying completed registration forms. The supervisor, 31-year-old Colin Small, has been charged with 13 counts of voter fraud. Pinpoint, a subsidiary of Strategic Allied Consulting, was contracted by the Republican Party of Virginia.

Allegations of voter registration fraud by Strategic Allied Consulting have also been raised in Arizona and Colorado, according to the Democrats.

“While the Republican National Committee and five state committees have severed their relationship with Strategic Allied Consulting, we are concerned that the alleged illegal practices may be continuing under its subsidiary Pinpoint,” the three congressmen wrote. “We respectfully request the Justice Department to assume the responsibility and conduct its own investigation, given the mounting evidence that one company may have been engaged in a similar multi-state effort to commit voter registration fraud.”

Strategic Allied is owned by Nathan Sproul, whose previous consulting firm — Sproul & Associates — was accused of destroying Democratic voter registration forms in 2004 during a RNC-funded voter registration drive.
