In 32 states and Washington, D.C., voters are eligible to cast their ballot early with no excuse for doing so. For people whose jobs, child-care obligations, or other commitments make it difficult or impossible to reach the polls on Election Day, the opportunity to vote early extends the franchise. Spreading out voting over more days makes lines at the polls shorter, benefiting citizens. It also makes the election less vulnerable to unexpected events, like bad weather, broken voting machines, or terrorist attacks, that could conceivably disrupt things on a single Tuesday. Finally, states that permit voting on Sundays make it easier for churchgoers to participate in "Souls to the Polls" events, where congregations exercise their franchise together after services, walking or carpooling together to their polling place. So why not expand early voting?In 2008, high voter demand suggested more hours open, more polling places, and more poll workers were needed. Instead, Republicans in several contested states have fought to restrict early voting, sometimes successfully. (Did I mention that "Souls to the Polls" mostly happens in black churches?) Let's quickly survey the results of their recent efforts: 

These are hardly the only examples, but you get the idea.

In Florida and Ohio, state officials arranged things such that citizens had to stand in line for hours to cast their ballot. Asked to extend early voting so that casting a ballot might be a bit less burdensome, they refused. It's an outrage. What's the worst that could've happened, a bit of overtime pay for election workers so that more Americans eligible to vote could do so? I don't always agree with everything Rachel Maddow says, but on this subject she is absolutely right:

Josh Marshall It's not clear to me that it will affect the final outcome in the presidential race. But let's note that the dogged efforts of Republican governors in a number of key states to dramatically limit early voting is starting to pay dividends. This is qualitatively different from the standard voter suppression efforts Republicans have focused on. No state has to have early voting. Here in New York, supposedly one of the progressive states in the country, there's none. But the intent of curtailing early voting systems that were already in place is clear: limit the amount of people who end up voting. Particularly, limit the number of Democrats who vote since Democrats are disproportionately the people who take advantage of early voting.Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted Says Josh Marshall There are a lot of words to describe what Scott, Ohio Secretary of State Jon Husted , and various Republican state legislators and activists have done with regard to early voting: undemocratic, wrongheaded, cynical .... I shy away from un-American not because it is too harsh, but because the United States has an ugly tradition of partisans adopting measures knowing that they'll depress the ability of voters "on the other side" to be counted on Election Day. When found out, those people deservedly wind up as villains in the history books.These men's legacies are so tarnished. Unless and until they reverse course, let it haunt them in every future election where they compete, grate daily on their consciences, expose them to the rebuke of friends and family members, and be written into early paragraphs of their obituaries.
