A UNITED STATES JUDGE has given Samsung permission to add the Iphone 5 to its ongoing patent lawsuit against Apple, while allowing Apple to pursue the Galaxy Note and Galaxy S3 but not Android Jelly Bean.

On Thursday US Magistrate Judge Paul Grewal gave Apple and Samsung the nod to add more products to their never ending patent lawsuit.

Samsung first sought to add the Iphone 5 at the beginning of October, claiming that the latest Apple smartphone infringes eight of its patents relating to wireless data technology.

Grewal said that Samsung acted with "reasonable diligence" in asking to add the Iphone 5 to the case, Reuters reports, a decision that Apple did not oppose. He always warned Apple to "think twice before opposing similar amendments reflecting other newly released products - e.g. the Ipad 4 and Ipad Mini - that Samsung may propose in the near future."

Still, Apple is unlikely to be all that bothered, as it has managed to get the Samsung Nexus, Galaxy Note 2 and Galaxy S3 handsets added to the lawsuit, but not Android 4.x Jelly Bean. The Cupertino company revealed its intentions to add these products to the lawsuit earlier this month, although it's still unclear why it is gunning for these products.

According to Adam Leach, principal analyst at Ovum, Apple is doing so merely to slow down its competitor Samsung. He told the INQUIRER, "I think Apple's agenda is just to slow down the competition wherever they can.

"I think ultimately they know they're not going to be able to stop Samsung and Android from trading they're just going to try and slow them down, tying their time money and executives up in a court case. The only thing they get out of this is slowing them down."

Apple has yet to respond to our request for comment, but Samsung told The INQUIRER, "We have always preferred to compete in the marketplace with our innovative products, rather than in a courtroom.

"However, Apple continues to take aggressive legal action that will restrict market competition. Under these circumstances, we have little recourse but to take the steps necessary to protect our innovations and intellectual property rights." µ
