Apple is set to announce a next-generation iPhone at 10am PDT in San Francisco Wednesday morning. As is typical before these media launch events, rumors about what Apple is expected to announce have leaked at an ever-increasing pace. We've already detailed most of the information out there about what appears to be called the "iPhone 5," but more purported details have been leaked in the last several hours, particularly about new iPods.

Searching for "iPhone 5" on Apple's website began returning non-functioning results early this morning, according to 9to5Mac, a sure sign that this will be the official name. The device is expected to feature 4G LTE compatibility, an updated processor, a taller 4" screen, and a newly developed connector to replace the decade-old 30-pin Dock connector. That connector is reportedly codenamed "Lightning," according to 9to5Mac sources. It will reportedly be able to sync much faster than the current USB 2.0-based Dock connector, likely using USB 3.0, which was recently introduced on the latest Macs.

Some developers digging into iOS 6 have also discovered a few possible features which may be announced today or show up when iOS 6 ships, according to iMore. One is support for near-field communications, or NFC. The technology is mostly associated with mobile payment systems, but as developer Will Strafach noted, it can be used for much more than just payments. His delve into iOS 6 reveals that engineering verification test (EVT) models of the iPhone 5 did in fact contain NFC hardware, and he believes it would be unlikely that Apple would remove such a feature in the final design.

Another developer discovered support for additional USB audio peripherals, as well as support for the FAT filesystem used by older MSDOS/Windows PCs and a wide variety of embedded devices. This may have implications for those that use iOS devices for music recording and production.

Support for a long-rumored panorama photo feature is also contained in iOS 6, and, according to one developer, may be software-locked to the iPhone 5. We have argued that new software features are some pretty low-hanging fruit for Apple when it comes to improving the iPhone's camera, and I personally hope there's more than just this rumored panorama feature announced today.

Finally, sources for MacRumors suggested that Apple's online support staffing levels are set to increase early Friday morning, pointing toward preorders for the iPhone 5 beginning on September 14. No word on the official ship date, but that has previously been pegged for the following Friday, September 21.

The iPod touch, which hasn't been updated since 2010, is expected to get the "biggest upgrade ever" today, according to KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi Kuo. As detailed by MacRumors, Kuo expects the iPod touch to get the same taller, 4" screen as the iPhone 5, though it will likely be a less-expensive, lower-quality version (the same is true for the current iPod touch versus the iPhone 4 and 4S). It is likely to be powered by the 32nm version of the A5 processor, though it's not clear if it will be dual-core, like those used in recent iPad 2 models, or the single-core version used in the Apple TV. Either would be a significant upgrade from the A4 processor, but for gaming—one of the top uses for the iPod touch—we expect Apple will go with dual-core.

The iPod touch is also said to gain GPS hardware for the first time, which could make the device far more useful for navigation and mapping when used outside of a WiFi network. The camera is expected to be upgraded—it sorely needs it—to a 5MP module similar to the one used in the iPhone 4 and iPad 3. The new iPod touch—like all new Apple portable devices—should get the new smaller "Lightning" connector. And, it may come in several colors, more than just the current white and black.

There are a few more audio-related bits out there as well. The iPod nano is getting a new internal model codename (N31), suggesting some kind of hardware revision. Meanwhile, the iPod shuffle is expected to be slightly revised (N12B), and remain at a 2GB capacity. Both are believed to be available in eight different colors. The current-generation A4-powered iPod touch will, according to an unnamed US retailer, stick around as an entry-level model. And Apple is believed to have redesigned earbuds, possibly called "Earpods," ready to ship with iPods and iPhones announced today.

Finally, Apple has seeded what appears to be one of the last test builds of OS X 10.8.2. The update includes the systemwide Facebook integration promised at Mountain Lion's launch, which comes standard in iOS 6. It also likely supports the new devices Apple is expected to announce today. In addition, it includes support for PowerNap on 2010 MacBook Airs, greater integration with GameCenter, FaceTime, and Messages between Macs and iOS devices, and various system improvements. OS X 10.8.2 will likely be released to the public at the same time as iOS 6 later this month.

Our intrepid Senior Apple Editor Jacqui Cheng will be at Apple's media event today, bringing you live coverage of all the announcements as they happen. As noted, the event starts at 10am PDT (see it in your timezone).
