The technology giant can't catch a break: for the most-leaked iPhone to date, Apple today delivered the nail in the leaky coffin.

Apple's next-generation smartphone will be called the iPhone 5, according to an inactive link accidentally posted on the company's own Web site hours before the highly anticipated device is expected to be announced in San Francisco.

By searching Apple's Web site for the term "iPhone 5," the search results yield a listing to a press release primed for later today. In the address listing, it says: "Apple-Introduces-iPhone-5," giving a fairly clear indication of what the forthcoming device will be called, 9to5Mac reported earlier today.

The link appears dead at this stage and the page doesn't load. But that's not all.

The iPhone 5 will also include 4G LTE connectivity, according to the search results. Typing in "iPhone LTE," on Apple's website, a dead link appears that shows a page on LTE, otherwise known as Long Term Evolution, the standard for 4G connectivity around the world.

Along with the iPhone, Apple seems to be getting ready to release the "one more thing" expected at today's event. If one searches for "new iPod touch," another search listing with a dead link shows that Apple is ready to announce a new iPod Touch and an iPod Nano at today's event.

A new version of iTunes is also expected to be announced at today's event. Typing in "unveils-new-iTunes" on Apple's Web site indicates that a press release is ready to launch once Apple concludes its presentation later this morning.

Despite Apple CEO Tim Cook's bid to "double down on secrecy," the technology giant has seen more parts and components leak to the press in the past six months than any other previous iPhone release. And that's even taking into account the iPhone 4 prototype that was left at a bar in 2010.

While the page "cannot be found," it surely will be in the coming hours. The event begins at 10 a.m. PT, and you can check out CNET's live coverage here.

The iPhone 5 is expected to be a brand-new design with a thinner body and taller screen. It's tipped to include global 4G LTE connectivity, Siri improvements, a new smaller dock connector, and the next-generation iOS 6 mobile operating system.

CNET contacted Apple for comment, and we'll update the story when the company responds.

Updated at 7:30 a.m. to include new iTunes search result.

Updated at 7:50 a.m. to include search results on 4G LTE connectivity for the iPhone 5.

Updated at 8:40 a.m. to credit 9to5Mac as the original source, which was mistakenly left out of the original piece.
