The South Korean company could seek in injunction in Europe and in Korea against Apple’s new iPhone, which it apparently believes will use technology that violates its patents.

Though little is known about Apple’s new iPhone, Samsung believes the phone will almost certainly rely on telecoms patents that it holds, according to South Korea’s Maeil Business Newspaper.

The two companies have been locked in legal battles worldwide over the last few months. Apple initially sued Samsung in the US in April, claiming that its products had been “slavishly” copied by its rivals. Samsung counter-sued almost immediately.

Earlier this summer Apple briefly obtained a Europe-wide injunction against Samsung’s Galaxy Tab 10.1, a tablet computer that Apple claimed had copied elements of its iPad. A German court later lifted the Europe-wide ban but upheld a ban on the device in Germany.

While the Galaxy Tab case was about an industrial design right, the hypothetical injunction against the iPhone 5 would be a patent infringement claim.

“We are preparing aggressive legal suits against Apple, shifting away from our defensive strategy. We stand a good chance of winning the cases if we use our patents related to wireless communications standards,“ a Samsung spokesman said.

Should an injunction claim succeed, it would be a significant blow to Apple, which is now the largest company in the world by market capitalisation and is thought to draw around half its revenue from the iPhone.

The new iPhone remains shrouded in secrecy, as Apple products always are before launch. However, it is expected that the handset will be called iPhone 5 and could be released alongside a smaller ‘iPhone 4S’.

Rumours about the phone suggest that it will have a faster processor, an improved camera and will be released some time next month. Earlier today, a post on the blog AllThingsD claimed that Apple would hold on event on October 4th at which Tim Cook, the company’s new CEO.

The increased value of the mobile sector in recent years has led to a flurry of lawsuits, with pretty much every major manufacturer suing, and being sued by, its rivals. Two weeks ago it emerged that HTC had bought nine patents from Google, acquired when Google took over Motorola, and was using them to pursue a new infringement case against Apple.

That action followed a win for Apple in July, when a preliminary ruling from the International Trade Commission found HTC guilty of patent violation. Apple and HTC have been exchanging lawsuits since March last year.

The rise of Google’s Android mobile operating system has been the catalyst for this increase in legal activity. Manufacturers that make Android handsets, such as HTC and Samsung, have an advantage in not having to pay to develop the operating system. Rivals are therefore determined to minimise that advantage by ruthlessly pursuing patented technology. It is believed that Microsoft makes more from the patents it licences to Android than it does from its own mobile operating system, Windows Phone 7.
