In light of the recent update in the developer's agreement for the iPhone, countless discussions have appeared on the internet which follow the same beaten path of such conversations.

Namely, they boil down to somebody saying someting along these lines:

"It's Steve Job's company, and he has every right to do whatever he wants with it. He sets up the rules. If you don't like the rules, don't buy his products, don't bitch about it on the forums".

This point is incorrect for many reasons, one of them being that if you don't like people bitching about anything, you are just as free to not read it. However, that's not the reason I am going to talk about. The reason I will talk about is this:

*Doing so does not make sense from an economic point of view. *

All these assumptions are false. First of all, it is rarely the case that there exists a product on the market that has all the feature any particular customer wants. For that matter, one can desire a product that, in fact, is an iPhone with feature X on it.

Secondly, the argument assumes that one can just go and buy a new piece of technology at any time, even if there is a product that satisfies the requirements. Not all people have the budget to switch. Some are tied by other factors (e.g. people who actually want an iPhone might be deterred by AT&T). Some people purhcased a product before a better one appeared on the market.

Thirdly, simply buying a competitor's product doesn't work if only a minority of its users are not satisfied. As long as the decrease in the influx of customers is a smaller loss than the cost of adding a feature (think Fight Club!).

More importantly, a person who bought an iPhone, didn't like it and switched is not a loss for Apple if the said person is silent about it. This brings us to the fourth point: that's exactly what Apple would want you to do: they would rather lose customers than have complaining customers. This is why the phones are locked and the App store is insanely restrictive, in spite of potential loss of customers that it brings.

So, as a consumer who is unhappy about X on the iPhone, what are you to do?

You are to bitch about it, loudly and publicly. You are to scream in all forums about how X makes your life miserable, and how iPhone is not good without X. You are to say that you are going to switch to an Android phone next month because X on the iPhone makes it unusable for everybody. Make a "Top 5 reasons why you shouldn't own an iPhone" on your blog ("Top 10" if you own one), with X being the No. 1 reason.

In short, you are to make a person about to buy an iPhone reconsider doing it because of X.

So, you are to make some bad publicity for Apple. Bad publicity is always a loss for a company, and it's a loss that is noticeable to shareholders. In this day and age, even a blog post can go far. And if you scare the shareholders, even Steve Jobs will have to abide. And if Apple still keeps its course in spite of your efforts, you still win by strengthening the competition, who (if smart) might even make a product for you that is good and has X.

tl;dr: if you want a feature X on a platform, bitching about X en masse is an effective way to hurt the company just enough for it to provide X for you. So, Bitching is a good negative reinforcement.
