Conservative MSNBC host Joe Scarborough on Monday attempted to shut down any talk of voter suppression by shouting “Benghazi! Benghazi! Benghazi!” over and over again to change the subject to the September attacks on Americans in Libya, a topic that Republicans believe hurts President Barack Obama.

During a discussion about the tight presidential race in Florida, co-host Mika Brzezinski attempted to point out that Republicans had restricted early voting, creating long lines and chaos for voters in some counties.

“You just feel like you have to finish with a story, Republicans bad, [Florida Gov.] Rick Scott bad, voting suppression,” Scarborough complained, throwing up his arms. “I have three words: Benghazi, Benghazi, Benghazi. I’m wandering around my ranch house muttering the words, ‘Benghazi.’ I mean, seriously, are we going here? Are we really going here?”

“But you know what?” Brzezinski attempted to continue. “We’ve had a…”

“It’s absolutely a story,” NBC’s David Gregory said of the long voter lines.

“It’s something we have to watch very carefully,” Gregory added. “And by the way, I think the Benghazi issue, I think there are real questions about Benghazi. There are serious questions… well, he brought it up!”

“Why do you want to cover up Benghazi?” Scarborough shouted, pointing at MSNBC.com executive editor Richard Wolffe. “Benghazi! Benghazi! Benghazi!”

“Is the voter story I just read a story?” Brzezinski asked Republican strategist Steve Schmidt.

“Benghazi, Benghazi,” Scarborough muttered as Schmidt tried to answer.

“I mean, kind of,” the Republican strategist admitted. “Is it possible a local elections officials in Florida screwed up the early voting? Yes. Is it part of some big, giant Republican conspiracy out there? Absolutely not.”

“So what happened in Benghazi?” Scarborough said.

“I think we can all agree, Republicans and Democrats — whatever your preference — they all should be able to vote,” Wolffe explained. “Those lines are offensive wherever they are, whoever’s responsible. Lines should not happen for several hours just to allow people to do that.”

“I agree,” Scarborough replied. “Just like I agree that we really need to get to the bottom of what happened in Benghazi.”
