As the US Eastern Seaboard struggles to come to terms with the impact of Tropical Storm Sandy, presidential election campaigning has been temporarily suspended. “The election can take of itself,” Barack Obama said yesterday evening.

At least, I thought it had been suspended. But I was wrong. The election can’t take care of itself after all.

It’s just been announced that Mitt Romney is to attend a “storm relief event”. His vice presidential running mate Paul Ryan will attend a separate event to “thank volunteers”. And his wife Ann Romneywill be appearing at her own separate “storm relief events”.

All good, non-partisan stuff. Except Paul Ryan isn’t thanking volunteers in New York or Atlantic City. He’s thanking them in the in the pivotal swing state of Wisconsin. And he’s not thanking volunteers actually involved in the relief effort (they’re too busy trying to bring relief to people). He’s thanking people who are collecting supplies for the relief effort. And they, entirely coincidently, happen to be collecting those supplies in one of the “firewall” states he and Mitt Romney have to win next Tuesday.

And Anne Romney? As I said, she’s attending two “storm relief events” of her own. And where are they being held? Well, knock me down with a feather. Or a hurricane. Anne’s off to Wisconsin and Iowa. Again, neither significantly affected by Sandy. But both vital to her husband's election chances.

What about Mitt Romney himself? His “relief event” is taking place – again purely by chance – in Ohio. Yes, that just happens to be the same Ohio every commentator acknowledges he has to win if he wants to win the White House. But let me reiterate, it’s not an election rally. The USA Today story reporting his itinerary makes that perfectly clear. “The GOP presidential ticket cancelled its scheduled campaign rallies out of sensitivity for the millions of people in the storm's path,” it takes care to remind us.

The fact that Romney is being joined by “race car driver Richard Petty and country singer Randy Owen”, is, again, a mere quirk of fate. And were I to find myself coordinating the response to a major natural disaster, the first group I would turn to would be my crack team of rapid-response country and western vocalists.

Am I being too cynical? Perhaps I am. Mitt Romney has an election to win, and Barack Obama is going to get the next 72 hours to swan around looking presidential.

But I thought Mitt Romney and his supporters shunned petty politicking at these times of great national crisis. It was Mitt Romney who said in the second presidential debate: “I find more troubling than this, that on the day following the assassination of the United States ambassador – the first time that’s happened since 1979 – when we have four Americans killed there, when apparently we didn’t know what happened, that the President, the day after that happened, flies to Las Vegas for a political fund-raiser.” Ah. But flying off to Ohio for a political photocall – sorry, but who are we kidding – less than 24 hours after 16 Americans have been killed in the worst storm in a generation is just fine.

Perhaps the election will be able to take care of itself for a couple of days. But if it can’t, don’t worry. Mitt Romney will be on hand just in case.
