From CBS News in March 2012, as part of an article where Mark Knoller breathlessly tells us how fast President Obama is adding more to the deficit than his predecessors, we get this graph showing where the deficit currently stands:

But the total deficit and how fast it is rising under President Obama is only part of the discussion.  From Ezra Klein, in January 2012, we get the following two graphs showing the how both President George W. Bush and President Obama affect the deficit numbers:

Looking at the two graphs, one can see that Bush added $5.1 trillion over 8 years and President Obama is only projected to add $983 billion over an 8 year period.  

Even the Wall Street Journal has confirmed that President Obama has actually lowered the growth of the spending rate:

In case you're wondering, The Wall Street Journal piece also had this graph showing the rate of spending growth back to President Reagan:

This might leave you scratching your head about the increase of the deficit.  Where is the increase coming from?  As can be seen in this chart from the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, the largest part of the increase comes from revenue losses caused by the Bush tax cuts and the economic downturn:

If you watched the Republican convention you might have seen the debt clock prop they introduced as a major theme.  (link)   Or if you read the recent piece by Matt Taibbi, you might have learned that Mitt Romney is, rather hypocritically, emphasizing the debt as a way criticizing President Obama.  Here is a Romney quote:

Under President George W. Bush, Republicans in congress voted for tax cuts, two wars and a huge Medicare Prescription drug benefit, all unfunded.  Under this Democratic President, Republicans have suddenly found Jesus when it comes to deficit spending.  You can go here and click on the button that says "Burden of Debt' to hear Paul Ryan, who was one of the Republicans who voted for the tax cuts and the wars and the prescription drug benefit, opine on the subject.  Or you can watch Ryan rail against the borrow and spend approach here:

There are those who believe this is all political posturing:

Few are better than Senator Bernie Sanders at exposing the hypocrisy behind the sudden interest in the deficit:

Let's start by playing a little game of "Guess the speaker." Who is the person quoted below making the case for deficit spending that will lead to later revenue surpluses?

Joe Biden? No.  Barack Obama?  No.  Harry Reid?  No.  Nancy Pelosi?  No.  Chuck Schumer?  No.  Some Blue Dog Democrat maybe, sneaking in the word bipartisan to make the bipartisan fetishists in the DC cocktail circuit happy?  No.  Give up?  OK, it's Paul Ryan.  Yes that Paul Ryan.



The 2002 Ryan makes a lot more sense than the current pseudo-deficit hawk version.  Besides not balancing the budget until 2050, Ryan's budget would shift lots of costs to states and localities, making the cuts to state and local services.  Here is a graph from CBPP (click on the provided link for more explanation of how this would impact state and local services) showing how much worse than sequestration the Ryan Budget would be :

The real world solution to this is to ignore the lies of the lead Republicans when it comes to dealing with the deficit and elect a Democratic Congress that will not lead us over a cliff when it comes to Budget negotiations.  We face three scenarios.  According to the CBO, we can have the fiscal cliff Republican version:

There is a second version that involves getting Republicans to cooperate.  There is little or no chance of that happening.  Or we can have the better non-fiscal cliff version that involves having a Democratic Congress: If you really want to fix the deficit, elect a Democratic Congress!!!

Thanks for the rescue!
