‘Out of touch’ doesn’t even begin to describe Mitt Romney. I can’t believe this country is thisclose to electing lying sociopath that is so obvious his handlers do little or nothing to stop the blatant horrors coming out of his mouth. In fact he has to have a team of like-minded people in order to unleash a continual stream of blunders and unmitigated falsehoods. That only makes it worse.

So today Mittens holds his wholly off-the-mark (what’s new) “Sandy Relief” sideshow, collecting groceries at an Ohio campaign event for the Red Cross, which, along with other private charities has been clear that monetary donations to the orgs are the best way to assist those in need by getting relevant resources to victims of natural disasters. (Salon):

It’s impossible not to see that this storm has devastated Mitt Romney’s presidential candidacy. The response to the hurricane has seemed like one long dramatic Obama campaign commercial, a lesson in “We’re all in this together,” while Romney, the man who said he’d dismantle FEMA, flails on the sidelines. Romney’s “relief” event outside of Dayton, Ohio, was surreal enough to be a campaign parody, with the candidate comparing the federal government’s hurricane relief efforts to the time he and some friends had to clean up a football field strewn with “rubbish and paper products.” It was supposed to be a parable of how Republicans handle disaster – with private charity, not government intervention – as Romney told his audience, “It’s part of the American spirit, the American way, to give to people in need.” The Republican went on to talk about the time some Hurricane Katrina survivors were rerouted from Houston to Cape Cod and the good people of Cape Cod responded by donating food and, yes, television sets.

But who cares — he’s looking for the optics of caring, a quality the guy doesn’t remotely project, and undermines with his own words in public. He’s also having a hard time selling his “dump FEMA” and leave disaster relief to the states policy when one of his supporters, Chris Christie, the governor of New Jersey, is not only praising the President, but thinks very little of Romney’s stunt.



Romney promised to put the goods on a truck to where they’re needed, “I think New Jersey,” he said. That was a funny choice. Maybe it had to do with the fact that New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie has all but endorsed Obama in the last two days, repeatedly praising his “leadership.” He told the crew on “Morning Joe” that “It’s been very good working with the president. He and his administration have been coordinating with us. It’s been wonderful.” He told “Today” that FEMA’s response has been “excellent,” and he’s repeatedly tweeted his thanks to the president.

Reporters would not let Mittens off of the hook about his plans for FEMA.

“Gov are you going to eliminate FEMA?” a print pooler shouted, receiving no response. Wires reporters asked more questions about FEMA that were ignored. Romney kept coming over near pool to pick up more water. He ignored these questions: “Gov are you going to see some storm damage?” “Gov has [New Jersey Gov.] Chris Christie invited you to come survey storm damage?” “Gov you’ve been asked 14 times, why are you refusing to answer the question?”

Romney won’t answer because he can’t.
