Over 170,000 people are part of the Sophos community on Facebook. Why not join us on Facebook to find out about the latest security threats. Don't show me this again

Hi fellow Twitter user! Follow our team of security experts on Twitter for the latest news about internet security threats. Don't show me this again

Don't forget you can subscribe to the SophosLabs YouTube channel to find all our latest videos. Don't show me this again

Hi there! If you're new here, you might want to subscribe to our RSS feed for updates. Don't show me this again

Already using Google+? Find us on Google+ for the latest security news. Don't show me this again

On LinkedIn? Join the Naked Security discussion group and connect with your peers in the security industry. Don't show me this again

Sorry, something happened and we couldn't sign you up. Please come back later and try again.

Congratulations, you've successfully signed up for our daily news! Check your inbox soon, we've sent you an email.

Sorry, that email doesn't look right to us so we haven't added it to our list.

Join thousands of others, and sign up for Naked Security's newsletter

A little more than a month ago Apache went head to head with Microsoft over the choice of do not track (DNT) in Internet Explorer 10. Apache has now backed down and provides the code to ignore DNT as a commented option in its config files.

On Friday Yahoo! decided it was time to take over the resistance to DNT by announcing it would now ignore Internet Explorer 10 users' choices to not be tracked on grounds that it believes its users' experience is "better when it is personalized."

There are several problems with their argument.

The crux of the matter is whether Internet Explorer 10 is requiring users to choose a tracking preference. Considering the options presented during installation, this should be obvious.

Yahoo! and other organizations that depend upon advertising revenue need to find a balance between targeted ads and respect for user privacy. If I log into their services I expect personalized weather, sports, stock and targeted advertising.

If I simply click a link that leads to a Yahoo! asset, they should respect my choice, do not track, and present ads that may not be tailored, but still support Yahoo's valuable services.

Every day I receive non-targeted ads in my physical mailbox. Pizzas, manicures and concerts from the latest bands. Clearly this generates revenue and costs significantly more than delivering a banner ad.

I am not a piece of meat to be sent to market. Respect my choices and adapt your business model. I am happy to buy products and happy to pay for the services I receive.

Proof? Follow me on App.Net. If you care about your privacy, insist that companies honor your preferences and don't patronize those who don't.

And to Yahoo!: If you want to talk big about privacy, put your money where your mouth is. I don't begrudge you your methods, but respect my choices. Microsoft fairly presents a choice and you need to honor it or become irrelevant.
