I have always been interested in innovation, combining simple solutions with elegant design.  The Exhale was inspired by 19th century inventor Nikola Tesla and is the world's first truly bladeless ceiling fan.  It utilizes the science of laminar flow between an array of flat disks to efficiently move air throughout your environment.  This laminar movement creates a smooth uninterrupted airflow with virtually no noise.

The vortex airflow profile generated by the Exhale fan is unmatched in the ceiling fan industry. Air is not simply directed straight down, but moves around the room in a 360° horizontal flow.  The air passes over you from the side as if you were experiencing a cool spring day with its fresh-feeling and calm breeze.       This cyclonic airflow multiplies as the Exhale runs, mixing the air to eliminate hot and cold spots.  This complete homogenization of the air stabilizes the temperature, reducing stress on your air conditioning or heating system. Fewer cycles on your HVAC system results in lower heating and cooling bills.

Form does not always have to follow function.  We have worked tirelessly to create a minimalistic design without sacrificing performance that appeals to the sophisticated designer in all of us.  The Exhale fan fits comfortably in any room from the ultra modern to traditional. What we've done:  For the past 18 months, Exhale fans has been perfecting the function and design through renderings, computer modeling, and prototypes.  We have started manufacturing our production tooling and it is nearing completion. A high efficiency DC motor with 6-speed wireless remote has been sourced to bring the fan to life.  These DC ceiling fan motors reduce operating costs by 50%-80% over their AC counterparts.  We worked very closely with the manufacturer to custom build a model that will maximize the effectiveness of the laminar flow while not increasing power usage.  What we are doing:  After receiving the first parts from our production tools, we are perfecting the fit and finish as well as selecting the proper material to be used.  Packaging engineers are already working on initial designs for our review and testing.  Prototyping and tool building is very expensive.  At this point, we have "broke the piggy bank" and need your help to finish what we have started.  What we will do:  Our continued goal is to use our experience and advanced design techniques to build the best product for our customers.  We have been working with a company in New Albany, Indiana and will be manufacturing in the USA.  We are going to bring jobs and support to our local area and will wear the mark 'Made in the USA' proudly. Packaging design - We want to make sure your fan gets to your ceiling.

I get excited about products with great design that seem to utilize the simplest solutions for every day problems. A few years ago I found myself in a conundrum that I just couldn't get off my mind. I started to take a look at the current ceiling fans installed in my house and was unsatisfied with their look and performance. My wife and I decided it was time to replace our outdated fans, but were even more disappointed in the options that were available on the market. It was in that moment that inspiration struck. "Cyclonic air movement" Studying the science surrounding Nikola Tesla's bladeless turbines led me to a breakthrough that I knew was the perfect solution to the problem that was plaguing my thoughts. In 2005 the first bladeless ceiling fan was born. It wasn't aesthetically pleasing nor was it overwhelmingly functional, but it worked! Over the next few years, many prototypes and design changes were created, and the product started to take shape. Today with the help of my co-founder, Richard Halsall, we have been able to develop that initial thought into the world's first truly bladeless ceiling fan. Exhale Fans continued goal is to constantly innovate in the ceiling fan industry and bring inspiring designs to those who love innovation as much as we do.
