Struggling Japanese TV maker Sharp has warned it might not be able to survive on its own after doubling its full-year net loss forecast to $5.6bn.

"Our corporate group has booked massive second-quarter net and operating losses … and now see a serious negative operating cash flow. This raises serious doubts about [our ability] to continue as a going concern," it said in a statement on Thursday, adding that it was considering alliances with other companies.

Larger Japanese rival Sony made a small operating profit in July-September and kept its forecast for a full-year profit of $1.63bn (£1bn).

But the firm said it expects to sell fewer of its hand-held PSP and Vita consoles this year – 10 million – than it previously estimated. It also cut its sales forecast for televisions to 14.5m and compact digital cameras to 16 million. But the firm added that its forecast for PlayStation console sales remained at 16m units.

The poor news from Sony and Sharp follows that of rival Panasonic, which said on Wednesday that it will lose almost $10bn this year. The company says it is writing down billions of dollars of goodwill and assets in its mobile and energy units and preparing for more restructuring that is likely to see it shift away from money-losing TVs and other consumer electronics.

Panasonic, which has shed about 36,000 jobs, also skipped its dividend for the first time in more than six decades and cut its full-year TV sales forecast by more than a quarter to 9m sets. Its shares slumped by nearly a fifth on Thursday, wiping $3bn off its market value.

"Consumer needs have been changing and for too long Japanese electronics firms, like Sharp, with their size and heavy reliance on past successes, have been too slow to adapt," said Yuuki Sakurai, chief executive of Fukoku Capital Management.

Sharp has been in talks for months with Taiwanese firm Hon Hai about the becoming the Japanese company's biggest shareholder. Sharp said on Thursdaythat talks were ongoing and it expected some deal before a March deadline.

"Perhaps it will not fail within this year, but I don't think Sharp has a viable business in the next 3-5 years," said Tetsuro Ii, chief executive of Commons Asset Management in Tokyo.

"The company hasn't got much time left and they need to cut off businesses that they can, conserve cash and … produce something that's really competitive."

Sony maintained its full-year forecast as costs have fallen, even though it expects to shift fewer gadgets than it thought only a couple of months ago. The company also kept its forecast to sell 34m smartphones.

"The fact that Sony managed to maintain profits shows management's strong will and commitment to continue cost cuts even while their product sales remain sluggish," said Takashi Hiroki, chief strategist at Monex Inc. "Compared [with] Panasonic and Sharp … Sony's earnings should get some credit.

"But we still don't see what their major earnings driver will be in the future."

Sharp said it expected to report a full-year operating loss of 155bn yen (£1.2bn), more than the 100bn yen loss it had earlier predicted. But it forecast a second half operating profit – a target that will allow its banks to justify a $4.6bn bailout of the firm.

Sharp has secured further loans from banks in return for a pledge to cut 10,000 jobs, sell assets including overseas TV assembly plants, and return to profit. It has also mortgaged most of its offices and factories in Japan, including one that makes displays for Apples iPhone and iPad.

But observers say that may not be enough. Makoto Kikuchi, chief executive of Myojo Asset, said: "I don't think Sharp has a future. Even if it gets by this term, financial problems could emerge again next business year, and I don't see the banks coming to the rescue."

Sharp posted a July-September operating loss of 74.8bn yen, compared with a 30.1bn yen profit a year ago, as it booked a $1.1bn charge for a restructuring it has promised in return for financing. It also wrote down 61bn yen of deferred tax assets in the second quarter.

Sony managed a small operating profit – of 30.3bn yen – in the second quarter, after a loss a year ago, helped by the sale of a chemicals business that offset weak demand for its TVs and other devices.
