Sprint Chief Executive Dan Hesse has been effusive about the iPhone’s merits ever since the carrier won the right to sell the popular Apple device. On Wednesday, Hesse added another compliment to the list. The iPhone is so data-efficient, he said, it will help Sprint keep its mobile data plans unlimited.

That point, which Hesse made in an interview with Forbes following Sprint’s third-quarter earnings, could influence other wireless carriers as well as investors and consumers. Sprint, after all, is the only “big four” U.S. carrier that continues to offer an unlimited data plan with its smartphones. Industry observers often speculate when Sprint will have to adopt tiered pricing like AT&T and Verizon Wireless.

Sprint is still not saying when it may make that switch, but credits the iPhone for helping it push the date out further. “One of the beauties of carrying the iPhone is it extends the period of time and increases the likelihood of us maintaining unlimited data longer because it uses our network so efficiently,” said Hesse.

There are two main reasons why the iPhone rides lightly on networks, according to Hesse. The first is that the device is good at hunting for Wi-Fi connections and notifying users when Wi-Fi is available. That helps carriers like Sprint offload data traffic from their networks.

The iPhone’s other strength stems from Apple’s tight control over iPhone applications. Since Apple makes iPhone apps meet network efficiency thresholds, iPhone apps tend to “ping” networks less often than other mobile operating systems do. Cutting down on app “noise” lets carriers operate their networks in a more productive and ultimately more profitable manner. “It’s almost like a Prius,” said Hesse, comparing the iPhone to Toyota’s fuel-efficient car.

Sprint, of course, would like to keep its data plans unlimited as long as possible. The policy is one of the key advantages the No. 3 carrier has over its larger rivals. It is also Sprint’s principal selling point for the iPhone, which can also be purchased at AT&T and Verizon Wireless. “Our main [marketing] message is around unlimited,” noted Hesse. “It is what makes us distinct.”

Earlier this month, Sprint ended unlimited data access for users of its mobile broadband and hotspot services. The move sparked chatter that Sprint would cap data for smartphones, too. Hesse said Sprint was forced to amend its mobile broadband policy because of network congestion but that smartphones have not reached that point yet. “Data cards are much heavier users of our network than smartphones,” he said. “It’s still quite profitable for us to keep unlimited [data] on smartphones.”

Unlike AT&T and Verizon Wireless, Sprint did not reveal how many iPhones it sold during its launch in the final two weeks of the third quarter. Hesse told Forbes Sprint would not disclose iPhone sales figures until the company had “a full quarter of sales under its belt.” Instead, he spoke more generally, saying Sprint was “very encouraged” by early iPhone sales and impressed by the number of people who switched carriers to get Sprint’s iPhone specifically.

Early indicators are important because Sprint needs to sell millions of iPhones to earn back a $15.5 billion commitment it made to Apple in exchange for access to the device. Since Sprint pays Apple around $600 per phone and their contract spans four years, the annual target is about 6 million iPhones.

Despite its current momentum, the iPhone isn’t likely to edge out Sprint’s strong base of Android users for awhile. Asked about an analyst estimate that projected the iPhone would soon make up 50% of Sprint’s total smartphone sales, Hesse said the forecast was “a bit high.”
